11.

Sixty seconds. Thats how long were required to stand on our metal circles before the sound of a gong releases us. Step off before the minute is up, and land mines blow your legs off. Sixty seconds to take in the ring of tributes all equidistant from the Cornucopia, a giant golden horn shaped like a cone with a curved tail, the mouth of which is at least twenty feet high, spilling over with

the things that will give us life here in the arena. Food, containers of water, weapons, medicine, garments, fire starters. Strewn around the Cornucopia are other supplies, their value decreasing the farther they are from the horn. For instance, only a few steps from my feet lays a three-foot square of plastic. Certainly it could be of some use in a downpour. But there in the mouth, I can see a tent pack that would protect from almost any sort of weather. If I had the guts to go in and fight for it against the other twenty-three tributes. Which I have been instructed not to do. Were on a flat, open stretch of ground. A plain of hard-packed dirt. Behind the tributes across from me, I can see nothing, indicating either a steep downward slope or even cliff. To my right lies a lake. To my left and back, spars piney woods. This is where Haymitch would want me to go. Immediately. I hear his instructions in my head. Just clear out, put as much distance as you can between yourselves and the others, and find a source of water. But its tempting, so tempting, when I see the bounty waiting there before me. And I know that if I dont get it, someone else will. That the Career Tributes who survive the bloodbath will divide up most of these life-sustaining spoils. Something catches my eye. There, resting on a mound of blanket rolls, is a silver sheath of arrows and a bow, already strung, just waiting to be engaged. Thats mine, I think. Its meant for me. Im fast. I can sprint faster than any of

the girls in our school although a couple can beat me in distance races. But this forty-yard length, this is what I am built for. I know I can get it, I know I can reach it first, but then the question is how quickly can I get out of there? By the time Ive scrambled up the packs and grabbed the weapons, others will have reached the horn, and one or two I might be able to pick off, but say theres a dozen, at that close range, they could take me down with the spears and the clubs. Or their own powerful fists. Still, I wont be the only target. Im betting many of the other tributes would pass up a smaller girl, even one who scored an eleven in training, to take out their more fierce adversaries. Haymitch has never seen me run. Maybe if he had hed tell me to go for it. Get the weapon. Since thats the very weapon that might be my salvation. And I only see one bow in that whole pile. I know the minute must be almost up and will have to decide what my strategy will be and I find myself positioning my feet to run, not away into the stir rounding forests but toward the pile, toward the bow. When suddenly I notice Peeta, hes about five tributes to my right, quite a fair distance, still I can tell hes looking at me and I think he might be shaking his head. But the suns in my eyes, and while Im puzzling over it the gong rings out. And Ive missed it! Ive missed my chance! Because those extra couple of seconds Ive lost by not being ready are enough to change my mind about going in. My

feet shuffle for a moment, confused at the direction my brain wants to take and then I lunge forward, scoop up the sheet of plastic and a loaf of bread. The pickings are so small and Im so angry with Peeta for distracting me that I sprint in twenty yards to retrieve a bright orange backpack that could hold anything because I cant stand leaving with virtually nothing. A boy, I think from District 9, reaches the pack at the same time I do and for a brief time we grapple for it and then he coughs, splattering my face with blood. I stagger back, repulsed by the warm, sticky spray. Then the boy slips to the ground. Thats when I see the knife in his back. Already other tributes have reached the Cornucopia and are spreading out to attack. Yes, the girl from District 2, ten yards away, running toward me, one hand clutching a half-dozen knives. Ive seen her throw in training. She never misses. And Im her next target. All the general fear Ive been feeling condenses into at immediate fear of this girl, this predator who might kill me in seconds. Adrenaline shoots through me and I sling the

pack over one shoulder and run full-speed for the woods. I can hear the blade whistling toward me and reflexively hike the pack up to protect my head. The blade lodges in the pack. Both straps on my shoulders now, I make for the trees. Somehow I know the girl will not pursue me. That shell be drawn back into the Cornucopia before all the good stuff is gone. A grin crosses my face. Thanks for the knife, I think. At the edge of the woods I turn for one instant to survey the field. About a dozen or so tributes are hacking away at one another at the horn. Several lie dead already on the ground. Those who have taken flight are disappearing into the trees or into the void opposite me. I continue running until the woods have hidden me from the other tributes then slow into a steady jog that I think I can maintain for a while. For the next few hours, I alternate between jogging and walking, putting as much distance as I can between myself and my competitors. I lost my bread during the struggle with the boy from District 9 but managed to stuff my plastic in my sleeve so as I walk I fold it neatly and tuck it into a pocket. I also free the knife its a fine one with a long sharp blade, serrated near the handle, which will make it handy for sawing through things and slide it into my belt. I dont dare stop to examine the contents of the pack yet. I just keep moving, pausing only to check for pursuers. I can go a long time. I know that from my days in the woods. But I will need water. That was Haymitchs second instruction, and since I sort of botched the first, I keep a sharp eye out for any sign of it. No luck. The woods begin to evolve, and the pines are intermixed with a variety of trees, some I recognize, some completely foreign to me. At one point, I hear a noise and pull my knife, thinking I may have to defend myself, but Ive only startled a rabbit. Good to see you, I whisper. If

theres one rabbit, there could be hundreds just waiting to be snared. The ground slopes down. I dont particularly like this. Valleys make me feel trapped. I want to be high, like in the hills around District 12, where I can see my enemies approaching. But I have no choice but to keep going. Funny though, I dont feel too bad. The days of gorging myself have paid off. Ive got staying power even though Im short on sleep. Being in the woods is rejuvenating. Im glad for the solitude, even though its an illusion, because Im probably on-screen right now. Not consistently but off and on. There are so many deaths to show the first day that a tribute trekking

through the woods isnt much to look at. But theyll show me enough to let people know Im alive, uninjured and on the move. One of the heaviest days of betting is the opening, when the initial casualties come in. But that cant compare to what happens as the field shrinks to a handful of players. Its late afternoon when I begin to hear the cannons. Each shot represents a dead tribute. The fighting must have finally stopped at the Cornucopia. They never collect the bloodbath bodies until the killers have dispersed. On the opening day, they dont even fire the cannons until the initial fightings over because its too hard to keep track of the fatalities. I allow myself to pause, panting, as I count the shots. One . . . Two . . . Three . . . On and on until they reach eleven. Eleven dead in all. Thirteen left to play. My fingernails scrape at the dried blood the boy from District 9 coughed into my face. Hes gone, certainly. I wonder about Peeta. Has he lasted through the day? Ill know in a few hours. When they project the deads images into the sky for the rest of us to see. All of a sudden, Im overwhelmed by the thought that Peeta may be already lost, bled white, collected, and in the process of being transported back to the Capitol to be cleaned up, redressed, and shipped in a simple wooden box back to District 12. No longer here.Heading home. I try hard to remember if I saw him once the action started. But the last image I can conjure up is Peeta shaking his head as the gong rang out. Maybe its better, if hes gone already. He had no confidence he could win. And I will not end up with the unpleasant task of killing him. Maybe its better if hes out of this for good. I slump down next to my pack, exhausted. I need to go through it anyway before night falls. See what I have to work with. As I unhook the straps, I can feel its sturdily made although a rather unfortunate color. This orange will practically glow in the dark. I make a mental note to camouflage it first thing tomorrow. I flip open the flap. What I want most, right at this moment, is water. Haymitchs directive to immediately find water was not arbitrary. I wont last long without it. For a few days, Ill be able to function with unpleasant symptoms of dehydration, but after that I'll deteriorate into helplessness and be dead in a week, tops. I

carefully lay out the provisions. One thin black sleeping bag that reflects body heal. A pack of crackers. A pack of dried beef strips. A bottle of iodine. A box of wooden matches. A small coil of wire. A pair of sunglasses. And a half-gallon plastic

bottle with a cap for carrying water that's bone dry. No water. How hard would it have been for them to fill up the bottle? I become aware of the dryness in my throat and mouth, the cracks in my lips. I've been moving all day long. It's been hot and I've sweat a lot. I do this at home, but there are always streams to drink from, or snow to melt if it should come to it. As I refill my pack I have an awful thought. The lake. The one I saw while I was waiting for the gong to sound. What if that's the only water source in the arena? That way they'll guarantee drawing us in to fight. The lake is a full day's journey from where I sit now, a much harder journey with nothing to drink. And then, even if I reach it, it's sure to be heavily guarded by some of the Career Tributes. I'm about to panic when I remember the rabbit I startled earlier today. It has to drink, too. I just have to find out where. Twilight is closing in and I am ill at ease. The trees are too thin to offer much concealment. The layer of pine needles that muffles my footsteps also makes tracking animals harder when I need their trails to find water. And I'm still heading downhill, deeper and deeper into a valley that seems endless. Im hungry, too, but I dont dare break into my precious store of crackers and beef yet. Instead, I take my knife and go to work on a pine tree, cutting away the outer bark and scraping off a large handful of the softer inner bark. I slowly chew the stuff as I walk along. After a week of the finest food in the world, its a little hard to choke down. But Ive eaten plenty of pine in my life. Ill adjust quickly. In another hour, its clear Ive got to find a place to camp. Night creatures are coming out. I can hear the occasional hoot or howl, my first clue that Ill be competing with natural predators for the rabbits. As to whether Ill be viewed as a source of food, its too soon to tell. There could be any number of animals stalking me at this moment. But right now, I decide to make my fellow tributes a priority. Im sure many will continue hunting through the night. Those who fought it out at the Cornucopia will have food, an abundance of water from the lake, torches or flashlights, and weapons theyre itching to use. I can only hope Ive traveled far and fast enough to be out of range. Before settling down, I take my wire and set two twitch-up snares in the brush. I know its risky to be setting traps, but food will go so fast out here. And I cant set snares on the run. Still, I walk another five minutes before making camp. I pick my tree carefully. A willow, not terribly tall but set in a clump of other willows, offering concealment in those long, flowing tresses. I climb up, sticking to the stronger

branches close to

the trunk, and find a sturdy fork for my bed. It takes some doing, but I arrange the sleeping bag in a relatively comfortable manner. I place my backpack in the foot of the bag, then slide in after it. As a precaution, I remove my belt, loop it all the way around the branch and my sleeping bag, and refasten it at my waist. Now if I roll over in my sleep, I wont go crashing to the ground. Im small enough to tuck the top of the bag over my head, but I put on my hood as well. As night falls, the air is cooling quickly. Despite the risk I took in getting the backpack, I know now it was the right choice. This sleeping bag, radiating back and preserving my body heat, will be invaluable. Im sure there are several other tributes whose biggest concern right now is how to stay warm whereas I may actually be able to get a few hours of sleep. If only I wasnt so thirsty . . . Night has just come when I hear the anthem that proceeds the death recap. Through the branches I can see the seal of the Capitol, which appears to be floating in the sky. Im actually viewing another screen, an enormous one thats transported by of one of their disappearing hovercraft. The anthem fades out and the sky goes dark for a moment. At home, we would be watching full coverage of each and every killing, but thats thought to give an unfair advantage to the living tributes. For instance, if I got my hands on the bow and shot someone, my secret would be revealed to all. No, here in the arena, all we see are the same photographs they showed when they televised our training scores. Simple head shots. But now instead of scores they post only district numbers. I take a deep breath as the face of the eleven dead tributes begin and tick them off one by one on my fingers. The first to appear is the girl from District 3. That means that the Career Tributes from 1 and 2 have all survived. No surprise there. Then the boy from 4. I didnt expect that one, usually all the Careers make it through the first day. The boy from District 5 . . . I guess the fox-faced girl made it. Both tributes from 6 and 7. The boy from 8. Both from 9. Yes, theres the boy who I fought for the backpack. Ive run through my fingers, only one more dead tribute to go. Is it Peeta? No, theres the girl from District 10. Thats it. The Capitol seal is back with a final musical flourish. Then darkness and the sounds of the forest resume. Im relieved Peetas alive. I tell myself again that if I get killed, his winning will benefit my mother and Prim the most. This is what I tell

myself to explain the conflicting emotions that arise when I think of Peeta. The gratitude that he gave me an edge by professing his love for me in the interview. The anger at his superiority on the roof. The dread that we may come face-to-face at any moment in this arena. Eleven dead, but none from District 12. I try to work out who is left. Five Career Tributes. Foxface. Thresh and Rue. Rue . . . So she made it through the first day after all. I cant

help feeling glad. That makes ten of us. The other three Ill figure out tomorrow. Now when it is dark, and I have traveled far, and I am nestled high in this tree, now I must try and rest. I havent really slept in two days, and then theres been the long days journey into the arena. Slowly, I allow my muscles to relax. My eyes to close. The last thing I think is its lucky I dont snore. . . . Snap! The sound of a breaking branch wakes me. How long have I been asleep? Four hours? Five? The tip of my nose is icy cold. Snap! Snap! Whats going on? This is not the sound of a branch under someones foot, but the sharp crack of one coming from a tree. Snap! Snap! I judge it to be several hundred yards to my right. Slowly, noiselessly, I turn myself in that direction. For a few minutes, theres nothing but blackness and some scuffling. Then I see a spark and a small fire begins to bloom. A pair of hands warms over flames, but I cant make out more than that. I have to bite my lip not to scream every foul name I know at the fire starter. What are they thinking? A fire Ill just at nightfall would have been one thing. Those who battled at the Cornucopia, with their superior strength and surplus of supplies, they couldnt possibly have been near enough to spot the flames then. But now, when theyve probably been combing the woods for hours looking for victims. You might as well be waving a flag and shouting, Come and get me! And here I am a stones throw from the biggest idiot in the Games. Strapped in a tree. Not daring to flee since my general location has just been broadcast to any killer who cares. I mean, I know its cold out here and not everybody has a sleeping bag. But then you grit your teeth and stick it out until dawn! I lay smoldering in my bag for the next couple of hours really thinking that if I can get out of this tree, I wont have the least problem taking out my new neighbor. My instinct has been to flee, not fight. But obviously this persons a hazard. Stupid people are dangerous. And this one probably doesnt have much in the way of weapons while Ive got this excellent knife.

The sky is still dark, but I can feel the first signs of dawn approaching. Im beginning to think we meaning the person whose death Im now devising and me we might actually have gone unnoticed. Then I hear it. Several pairs of feet breaking into a run. The fire starter must have dozed off. Theyre on her before she can escape. I know its a girl now, I can tell by the pleading, the agonized scream that follows. Then theres laughter and congratulations from several voices. Someone cries out, Twelve down and eleven to go! which gets a round of appreciative hoots. So theyre fighting in a pack. Im not really surprised. Often alliances are formed in the early stages of the Games. The strong band together to hunt down the weak then, when the tension becomes too great, begin to turn on one another. I dont have to wonder too hard who has made this alliance. Itll be the remaining Career

Tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4. Two boys and three girls. The ones who lunched together. For a moment, I hear them checking the girl for supplies. I can tell by their comments theyve found nothing good. I wonder if the victim is Rue but quickly dismiss the thought. Shes much too bright to be building a fire like that. Better clear out so they can get the body before it starts stinking. Im almost certain thats the brutish boy from District 2. There are murmurs of assent and then, to my horror, I hear the pack heading toward me. They do not know Im here. How could they? And Im well concealed in the clump of trees. At least while the sun stays down. Then my black sleeping bag will turn from camouflage to trouble. If they just keep moving, they will pass me and be gone in a minute. But the Careers stop in the clearing about ten yards from my tree. They have flashlights, torches. I can see an arm here, a boot there, through the breaks in the branches. I turn to stone, not even daring to breathe. Have they spotted me? No, not yet. I can tell from their words their minds are elsewhere. Shouldnt we have heard a cannon by now? Id say yes. Nothing to prevent them from going in immediately. Unless she isnt dead. Shes dead. I stuck her myself. Then wheres the cannon? Someone should go back. Make sure the jobs done. Yeah, we dont want to have to track her down twice. I said shes dead! An argument breaks out until one tribute silences the others. Were wasting time! Ill go finish her and lets move on! I almost fall out of the tree. The voice belongs to Peeta.

12.

Thank goodness, I had the foresight to belt myself in. Ive rolled sideways off the fork and Im facing the ground, held in place by the belt, one hand, and my feet straddling the pack inside my sleeping bag, braced against the trunk. There must have been some rustling when I tipped sideways, but the Careers have been too caught up in their own argument to catch it. Go on, then, Lover Boy, says the boy from District 2. See for yourself. I just get a glimpse of Peeta, lit by a torch, heading back to the girl by the fire. His face is swollen with bruises, theres a bloody bandage on one arm, and from the sound of his gait hes limping somewhat. I remember him shaking him his head, telling me not to go into the fight for the supplies, when all along, all along hed planned to throw himself into the thick of things. Just the opposite of what Haymitch had mid him to do. Okay, I can stomach that. Seeing all those supplies was tempting. But this . . . This other thing. This teaming up with the Career wolf pack to hunt down the rest of us. No one from District 12 would think of doing such a thing! Career tributes are overly vicious, arrogant, better fed, but only because theyre the Capitols lapdogs. Universally, solidly hated by all but those from their own districts. I can imagine the things theyre saying about him back home now. And Peeta had the gall to talk to me about disgrace? Obviously, the noble boy on the rooftop

was playing just one more game with me. But this will be his last. I will eagerly watch the night skies for signs of his death, if I dont kill him first myself. The Career tributes are silent until he gets out of ear shot, then use hushed voices. Why dont we just kill him now and get it over with? Let him tag along. Whats the harm? And hes handy with that knife. Is he? Thats news. What a lot of interesting things Im learning about my friend Peeta today. Besides, hes our best chance of finding her. It takes me a moment to register that the her theyre referring to is me. Why? You think she bought into that sappy romance stuff? She might have. Seemed pretty simpleminded to me. Every time I think about her spinning around in that dress, I want to puke. Wish we knew how she got that eleven. Bet you Lover Boy knows. The sound of Peeta returning silences them. Was she dead? asks the boy from District 2. No. But she is

now, says Peeta. Just then, the cannon fires. Ready to move on? The Career pack sets off at a run just as dawn begins to break, and birdsong fills the air. I remain in my awkward position, muscles trembling with exertion for a while longer, then hoist myself back onto my branch. I need to get down, to get going, but for a moment I lie there, digesting what Ive heard. Not only is Peeta with the Careers, hes helping them find me. The simpleminded girl who has to be taken seriously because of her eleven. Because she can use a bow and arrow. Which Peeta knows better than anyone. But he hasnt told them yet. Is he saving that information because he knows its all that keeps him alive? Is he still pretending to love me for the audience? What is going on in his head? Suddenly, the birds fall silent. Then one gives a high-pitched warning call. A single note. Just like the one Gale and I heard when the redheaded Avox girl was caught. High above the dying campfire a hovercraft materializes. A set of huge metal teeth drops down. Slowly, gently, the dead tribute girl is lifted into the hovercraft. Then it vanishes. The birds resume their song. Move, I whisper to myself. I wriggle out of my sleeping bag, roll it up, and place it in the pack. I take a deep breath. While Ive been concealed by darkness and the sleeping bag and the willow

branches, it has probably been difficult for the cameras to get a good shot of me. I know they must be tracking me now though. The minute I hit the ground, Im guaranteed a close-up. The audience will have been beside themselves, knowing I was in the tree, that I overheard the Careers talking, that I discovered Peeta was with them. Until I work out exactly how I want to play that, Id better at least act on top of things. Not perplexed. Certainly not confused or frightened. No, I need to look one step ahead of the game. So as I slide out of the foliage and into the dawn light, I pause a second, giving the cameras time to lock on me. Then I cock my head slightly to the side and give a knowing smile. There! Let them figure out

what that means! Im about to take off when I think of my snares. Maybe its imprudent to check them with the others so close. But have to. Too many years of hunting, I guess. And the lure of possible meat. Im rewarded with one fine rabbit. In no time, Ive cleaned and gutted the animal, leaving the head, feet, tail, skin, and innards, under a pile of leaves. Im wishing for a fire eating raw rabbit can give you rabbit fever, a lesson I learned the hard way when I think of the dead tribute. I hurry

back to her camp. Sure enough, the coals of her dying fire are still hot. I cut up the rabbit, fashion a spit out of branches, and set it over the coals. Im glad for the cameras now. I want sponsors to see I can hunt, that Im a good bet because I wont be lured into traps as easily as the others will by hunger. While the rabbit cooks, I grind up part of a charred branch and set about camouflaging my orange pack. The black tones it down, but I feel a layer of mud would definitely help. Of course, to have mud, Id need water . . . I pull on my gear, grab my spit, kick some dirt over the coals, and take off in the opposite direction the Careers went. I eat half the rabbit as I go, then wrap up the leftovers in my plastic for later. The meat stops the grumbling in my stomach but does little to quench my thirst. Water is my top priority now. As I hike along, I feel certain Im still holding the screen in the Capitol, so Im careful to continue to hide my emotions. But what a good time Claudius Templesmith must be having with his guest commentators, dissecting Peetas behavior, my reaction. What to make of it all? Has Peeta revealed his true colors? How does this affect the betting odds? Will we lose sponsors? Do we even have sponsors? Yes, I feel certain we do, or at least did. Certainly Peeta has thrown a wrench into our star-crossed lover

dynamic. Or has he? Maybe, since he hasnt spoken much about me, we can still get some mileage out of it. Maybe people will think its something we plotted together if I seem like it amuses me now. The sun rises in the sky and even through the canopy it seems overly bright. I coat my lips in some grease from the rabbit and try to keep from panting, but its no use. Its only been a day and Im dehydrating fast. I try and think of everything I know about finding water. It runs downhill, so, in fact, continuing down into this valley isnt a bad thing. If I could just locate a game trail or spot a particularly green patch of vegetation, these might help me along, but nothing seems to change. Theres just the slight gradual slope, the birds, the sameness to the trees. As the day wears on, I know Im headed for trouble. What little urine Ive been able to pass is a dark brown, my head is aching, and theres a dry patch on my tongue that refuses to moisten. The sun hurts my eyes so I dig out my sunglasses, but when I put them on they do something funny to my vision, so I just stuff them back in my pack. Its late afternoon when I think Ive found

help. I spot a cluster of berry bushes and hurry to strip the fruit, to suck the

sweet juices from the skins. But just as Im holding them to my lips, I get a hard look at them. What I thought were blueberries have a slightly different shape, and when I break one open the insides are bloodred. I dont recognize these berries, perhaps they are edible, but Im guessing this is some evil trick on the part of the Gamemakers. Even the plant instructor in the Training Center made a point of telling us to avoid berries unless you were 100 percent sure they werent toxic. Something I already knew, but Im so thirsty it takes her reminder to give me the strength to fling them away. Fatigue is beginning to settle on me, but its not the usual tiredness that follows a long hike. I have to stop and rest frequently, although I know the only cure for what ails me requires continued searching. I try a new tactic climbing a tree as high as I dare in my shaky state to look for any signs of water. But as far as I can see in any direction, theres the same unrelenting stretch of forest. Determined to go on until nightfall, I walk until Im stumbling over my own feet. Exhausted, I haul myself up into a tree and belt myself in. Ive no appetite, but I suck on a rabbit bone just to give my mouth something to do. Night falls, the anthem plays, and high in the sky I see the picture of the girl, who was apparently from District 8. The one Peeta went

back to finish off. My fear of the Career pack is minor compared to my burning thirst. Besides, they were heading away from me and by now they, too, will have to rest. With the scarcity of water, they may even have had to return to the lake for refills. Maybe, that is the only course for me as well. Morning brings distress. My heads throbs with every beat of my heart. Simple movements send stabs of pain through my joints. I fall, rather than jump from the tree. It takes several minutes for me to assemble my gear. Somewhere inside me, I know this is wrong. I should be acting with more caution, moving with more urgency. But my mind seems foggy and forming a plan is hard. I lean back against the trunk of my tree, one finger gingerly stroking the sandpaper surface of my tongue, as I assess my options. How can I get water? Return to the lake. No good. Id never make it. Hope for rain. Theres not a cloud in the sky. Keep looking. Yes, this is my only chance. But then, another thought hits me, and the surge of anger that follows brings me to me senses. Haymitch! He could send me water! Press a button and have it delivered to me in a silver parachute in minutes. I know I must have sponsors, at least one or two who could afford a pint of liquid for me. Yes, its pricey, but these people, theyre made of money. And theyll

be betting on me as well. Perhaps Haymitch doesnt realize how deep my need is. I say in a voice as loud as I dare. Water. I wait, hopefully, for a parachute to descend from the sky. But nothing is forthcoming. Something is wrong.

Am I deluded about having sponsors? Or has Peetas behavior made them all hang back? No, I dont believe it. Theres someone out there who wants to buy me water only Haymitch is refusing to let it go through. As my mentor, he gets to control the flow of gifts from the sponsors. I know he hates me. Hes made that clear enough. But enough to let me die? From this? He cant do that, can he? If a mentor mistreats his tributes, hell be held accountable by the viewers, by the people back in District 12. Even Haymitch wouldnt risk that, would he? Say what you will about my fellow traders in the Hob, but I dont think theyd welcome him back there if he let me die this way. And then where would he get his liquor? So . . . What? Is he trying to make me suffer for defying him? Is he directing all the sponsors toward Peeta? Is he just too drunk to even notice whats going on at the moment? Somehow I dont believe that and I dont believe hes trying to kill me off by neglect, either. He has, in fact, in his own unpleasant way, genuinely been trying to prepare me for this. Then what is going on? I bury my face in my hands. Theres no danger of tears now, I couldnt produce one to save my life. What is Haymitch doing? Despite my anger, hatred, and suspicions, a small voice in the back of my head whispers an answer. Maybe hes sending you a message, it says. A message. Saying what? Then I know. Theres only one good reason Haymitch could be withholding water from me. Because he knows Ive almost found it. I grit my teeth and pull myself to my feet. My backpack seems to have tripled in weight. I find a broken branch that will do for a walking stick and I start off. The suns beating down, even more searing than the first two days. I feel like an old piece of leather, drying and cracking in the heat. Every step is an effort, but I refuse to stop. I refuse to sit down. If I sit, theres a good chance I wont be able to get up again, that I wont even remember my task. What easy prey I am! Any tribute, even tiny Rue, could take me right now, merely shove me over and kill me with my own knife, and Id have little strength to resist. But if anyone is in my part of the woods, they ignore me. The truth is, I feel a million miles from another living soul. Not alone though. No, theyve surely got a camera tracking me now. I think back to

the years of watching tributes starve, freeze, bleed, and dehydrate to death. Unless theres a really good fight going on somewhere, Im being featured. My thoughts turn to Prim. Its likely she wont be watching me live, but theyll show updates at the school during lunch. For her sake, I try to look as least desperate as I can. But by afternoon, I know the end is coming. My legs are shaking and my heart too quick. I keep forgetting, exactly what Im doing. Ive stumbled repeatedly and managed to regain my feet, but when the stick slides out from under me, I finally tumble to the ground unable to get up. I let my eyes close. I have misjudged Haymitch. He has no

intention of helping me at all. This is all right, I think. This is not so bad here. The air is less hot, signifying evenings approach. Theres a slight, sweet scent that reminds me of lilies. My fingers stroke the smooth ground, sliding easily across the top. This is an okay place to die, I think. My fingertips make small swirling patterns in the cool, slippery earth. I love mud, I think. How many times Ive tracked game with the help of its soft, readable surface. Good for bee stings, too. Mud. Mud. Mud! My eyes fly open and I dig my fingers into the earth. It is mud! My nose lifts in the air. And those are lilies! Pond lilies! I crawl now, through the mud, dragging myself toward the scent. Five yards from where I fell, I crawl through a tangle of plants into a pond. Floating on the top, yellow flowers in bloom, are my beautiful lilies. Its all I can do not to plunge my face into the water and gulp down as much as I can hold. But I have just enough sense left to abstain. With trembling hands, I get out my flask and fill it with water. I add what I remember to be the right number of drops of iodine for purifying it. The half an hour of waiting is agony, but I do it. At least, I think its a half an hour, but its certainly as long as I can stand. Slowly, easy now, I tell myself. I take one swallow and make myself wait. Then another. Over the next couple of hours, I drink the entire half gallon. Then a second. I prepare another before I retire to a tree where I continue sipping, eating rabbit, and even indulge in one of my precious crackers. By the time the anthem plays, I feel remarkably better. There are no faces tonight, no tributes died today. Tomorrow Ill stay here, resting, camouflaging my backpack with mud, catching some of those little fish I saw as I sipped, digging up the roots of the pond lilies to make a nice meal. I snuggle down in my sleeping bag, hanging on to my water bottle for dear life, which, of course, it is. A few hours later,

the stampede of feet shakes me from slumber. I look around in bewilderment. Its not yet dawn, but my stinging eyes can see it. It would be hard to miss the wall of fire descending on me.

13.

My first impulse is to scramble from the tree, but Im belted in. Somehow my fumbling fingers release the buckle and I fall to the ground in a heap, still snarled in my sleeping bag. Theres no time for any kind of packing. Fortunately, my backpack and water bottle are already in the bag. I shove in the belt, hoist the bag over my shoulder, and flee. The world has transformed to flame and smoke. Burning branches crack from trees and fall in showers of sparks at my feet. All I can do is follow the others, the rabbits and deer and I even spot a wild dog pack shooting through the woods. I trust their sense of direction because their instincts are sharper than mine. But they are much faster, flying through the underbrush so gracefully as my boots catch on roots and fallen tree limbs, that theres no way I can keep apace with them. The heat is horrible, but worse than the heat is the smoke, which threatens to suffocate me at any moment. I pull the top of my shirt up over my nose, grateful to find it soaked in sweat, and it offers a thin veil of protection. And I run, choking, my bag banging against my back, my face cut with branches that materialize from the gray haze without warning, because I know I am supposed to run. This was no tributes campfire gone out of control, no accidental occurrence. The flames that bear down on me have an unnatural height, a uniformity that marks them as human-made, machine-made, Gamemaker-made. Things have been too quiet today. No deaths, perhaps no fights at all. The audience in the Capitol will be getting bored, claiming that these Games are verging on dullness. This is the one thing the Games must not do. Its not hard to follow the Gamemakers motivation. There is the Career pack and then there are the rest of us, probably spread far and thin across the arena. This fire is designed to flush us out, to drive us together. It may not be the most original device Ive seen, but its very, very effective. I hurdle over a burning log. Not high enough. The tail end of my jacket catches on fire and I have to stop to rip it from my body and stamp out the flames. But I dont dare leave the jacket, scorched and

smoldering as it is, I take the risk of shoving it in my sleeping bag, hoping the lack of air will quell what I havent extinguished. This is all I have, what I carry on my back, and its little enough to survive with. In a matter of minutes, my throat and nose are burning. The coughing begins soon after and my lungs begin to feel as if they are actually being cooked. Discomfort turns to distress until each breath sends a searing pain through my chest. I manage to take cover under a stone outcropping just as the vomiting begins, and I lose my meager supper and whatever water has remained in my stomach. Crouching on my hands and knees, I retch until theres nothing left to come up. I know I need to keep moving, but Im trembling and light-headed now, gasping for air. I allow myself about a spoonful of water to rinse my mouth and spit then take a few swallows from my bottle. You get one minute, I tell myself. One minute to rest. I take the time to reorder my supplies, wad up the sleeping bag, and messily stuff everything into the backpack. My minutes up. I know its time to move on, but the smoke has clouded my thoughts. The swift-footed animals that were my compass have left me behind. I know I havent been in this part of the woods before, there were no sizable rocks like the one Im sheltering against on my earlier travels.

Where are the Gamemakers driving me? Back to the lake? To a whole new terrain filled with new dangers? I had just found a few hours of peace at the pond when this attack began. Would there be any way I could travel parallel to the fire and work my way back there, to a source of water at least? The wall of fire must have an

end and it wont burn indefinitely. Not because the Gamemakers couldnt keep it fueled but because, again, that would invite accusations of boredom from the audience. If I could get back behind the fire line, I could avoid meeting up with the Careers. Ive just decided to try and loop back around, although it will require miles of travel away from the inferno and then a very circuitous route back, when the first fireball blasts into the rock about two feet from my head. I spring out from under my ledge, energized by renewed fear. The game has taken a twist. The fire was just to get us moving, now the audience will get to see some real fun. When I hear the next hiss, I flatten on the ground, not taking time to look. The fireball hits a tree off to my left, engulfing it in flames. To remain still is death. Im barely on my feet before the third ball hits the ground where I was lying, sending a pillar of fire up behind me. Time

loses meaning now as I frantically try to dodge the attacks. I cant see where theyre being launched from, but its not a hovercraft. The angles are not extreme enough. Probably this whole segment of the woods has been armed with precision launchers that are concealed in trees or rocks. Somewhere, in a cool and spotless room, a Gamemaker sits at a set of controls, fingers on the triggers that could end my life in a second. All that is needed is a direct hit. Whatever vague plan I had conceived regarding returning to my pond is wiped from my mind as I zigzag and dive and leap to avoid the fireballs. Each one is only the size of an apple, but packs tremendous power on contact. Every sense I have goes into overdrive as the need to survive takes over. Theres no time to judge if a move is the correct one. When theres a hiss, I act or die. Something keeps me moving forward, though. A lifetime of watching the Hunger Games lets me know that certain areas of the arena are rigged for certain attacks. And that if I can just get away from this section, I might be able to move out of reach of the launchers. I might also then fall straight into a pit of vipers, but I cant worry about that now. How long I scramble along dodging the fireballs I cant say, but the attacks finally begin to abate. Which is good, because Im retching

again. This time its an acidic substance that scalds my throat and makes its way into my nose as well. Im forced to stop as my body convulses, trying desperately to rid itself of the poisons Ive been sucking in during the attack. I wait for the next hiss, the next signal to bolt. It doesnt come. The force of the retching has squeezed tears out of my stinging eyes. My clothes are drenched in sweat. Somehow, through the smoke and vomit, I pick up the scent of singed hair. My hand fumbles to my braid and finds a fireball has seared off at least six inches of it. Strands of blackened hair crumble in my fingers. I stare at them, fascinated by the transformation, when the hissing registers. My muscles react, only not fast enough

this time. The fireball crashes into the ground at my side, but not before it skids across my right calf. Seeing my pants leg on fire sends me over the edge. I twist and scuttle backward on my hands and feet, shrieking, trying to remove myself from the horror. When I finally regain enough sense, I roll the leg back and forth on the ground, which stifles the worst of it. But then, without thinking, I rip away the remaining fabric with my bare hands. I sit on the ground, a few yards from the blaze

set off by the fireball. My calf is screaming, my hands covered in red welts. Im shaking too hard to move. If the Gamemakers want to finish me off, now is the time. I hear Cinnas voice, carrying images of rich fabric and sparkling gems. Katniss, the girl who was on fire. What a good laugh the Gamemakers must be having over that one. Perhaps, Cinnas beautiful costumes have even brought on this particular torture for me. I know he couldnt have foreseen this, must be hurting for me because, in fact, I believe he cares about me. But all in all, maybe showing up stark naked in that chariot would have been safer for me. The attack is now over. The Gamemakers dont want me dead. Not yet anyway. Everyone knows they could destroy us all within seconds of the opening gong. The real sport of the Hunger Games is watching the tributes kill one another. Every so often, they do kill a tribute just to remind the players they can. But mostly, they manipulate us into confronting one another face-to-face. Which means, if I am no longer being fired at, there is at least one other tribute close at hand. I would drag myself into a tree and take cover now if I could, but the smoke is still thick enough to kill me. I make myself stand and begin to limp away from the wall of flames that lights up the sky. It does not seem to be pursuing me any longer, except

with its stinking black clouds. Another light, daylight, begins to softly emerge. Swirls of smoke catch the sunbeams. My visibility is poor. I can see maybe fifteen yards in any direction. A tribute could easily be concealed from me here. I should draw my knife as a precaution, but I doubt my ability to hold it for long. The pain in my hands can in no way compete with that in my calf. I hate burns, have always hated them, even a small one gotten from pulling a pan of bread from the oven. It is the worst kind of pain to me, but I have never experienced anything like this. Im so weary I dont even notice Im in the pool until Im ankle-deep. Its spring-fed, bubbling up out of a crevice in some rocks, and blissfully cool. I plunge my hands into the shallow water and feel instant relief. Isnt that what my mother always says? The first treatment for a burn is cold water? That it draws out the heat? But she means minor burns. Probably shed recommend it for my hands. But what of my calf? Although I have not yet had the courage to examine it, Im guessing that its an injury in a whole different class. I lie on my stomach at edge of the

pool for a while, dangling my hands in the water, examining the little flames on

my fingernails that are beginning to chip off. Good. Ive had enough fire for a lifetime. I bathe the blood and ash from my face. I try to recall all I know about burns. They are common injuries in the Seam where we cook and heat our homes with coal. Then there are the mine accidents. . . . A family once brought in an unconscious young man pleading with my mother to help him. The district doctor whos responsible for treating the miners had written him off, told the family to take him home to die. But they wouldnt accept this. He lay on our kitchen table, senseless to the world. I got a glimpse of the wound on his thigh, gaping, charred flesh, burned clear down to the bone, before I ran from the house. I went to the woods and hunted the entire day, haunted by the gruesome leg, memories of my fathers death. Whats funny was, Prim, whos scared of her own shadow, stayed and helped. My mother says healers are born, not made. They did their best, but the man died, just like the doctor said he would. My leg is in need of attention, but I still cant look at it. What if its as bad as the mans and I can see my bone? Then I remember my mother saying that if a burns severe, the victim might not even feel pain because the nerves would be destroyed. Encouraged by this, I sit up and swing my leg in front of me. I almost faint

at the sight of my calf. The flesh is a brilliant red covered with blisters. I force myself to take deep, slow breaths, feeling quite certain the cameras are on my face. I cant show weakness at this injury. Not if I want help. Pity does not get you aid. Admiration at your refusal to give in does. I cut the remains of the pant leg off at the knee and examine the injury more closely. The burned area is about the size of my hand. None of the skin is blackened. I think its not too bad to soak. Gingerly I stretch out my leg into the pool, propping the heel of my boot on a rock so the leather doesnt get too sodden, and sigh, because this does offer some relief. I know there are herbs, if I could find them, that would speed the healing, but I cant quite call them to mind. Water and time will probably be all I have to work with. Should I be moving on? The smoke is slowly clearing but still too heavy to be healthy. If I do continue away from the fire, wont I be walking straight into the weapons of the Careers? Besides, every time I lift my leg from the water, the pain rebounds so intensely I have to slide it back in. My hands are slightly less demanding. They can handle small breaks from the pool. So I slowly put my gear back in order. First I fill my bottle with the pool water, treat it, and when enough time has passed, begin to rehydrate my body. After a time,

I force myself to nibble on a cracker, which helps settle my stomach. I roll up my sleeping bag. Except for a few black marks, its relatively unscathed. My jackets another matter. Stinking and scorched, at least

a foot of the back beyond repair. I cut off the damaged area leaving me with a garment that comes just to the bottom of my ribs. But the hoods intact and its far better than nothing. Despite the pain, drowsiness begins to take over. Id take to a tree and try to rest, except Id be too easy to spot. Besides, abandoning my pool seems impossible. I neatly arrange my supplies, even settle my pack on my shoulders, but I cant seem to leave. I spot some water plants with edible roots and make a small meal with my last piece of rabbit. Sip water. Watch the sun make its slow arc across the sky. Where would I go anyway that is any safer than here? I lean back on my pack, overcome by drowsiness. If the Careers want me, let them find me, I think before drifting into a stupor. Let them find me. And find me, they do. Its lucky Im ready to move on because when I hear the feet, I have less than a minute head start. Evening has begun to fall. The moment I awake, Im up and running, splashing across the pool,

flying into the underbrush. My leg slows me down, but I sense my pursuers are not as speedy as they were before the fire, either. I hear their coughs, their raspy voices calling to one another. Still, they are closing in, just like a pack of wild dogs, and so I do what I have done my whole life in such circumstances. I pick a high tree and begin to climb. If running hurt, climbing is agonizing because it requires not only exertion but direct contact of my hands on the tree bark. Im fast, though, and by the time theyve reached the base of my trunk, Im twenty feet up. For a moment, we stop and survey one another. I hope they cant hear the pounding of my heart. This could be it, I think. What chance do I have against them? All six are there, the five Careers and Peeta, and my only consolation is theyre pretty beat-up, too. Even so, look at their weapons. Look at their faces, grinning and snarling at me, a sure kill above them. It seems pretty hopeless. But then something else registers. Theyre bigger and stronger than I am, no doubt, but theyre also heavier. Theres a reason its me and not Gale who ventures up to pluck the highest fruit, or rob the most remote bird nests. I must weigh at least fifty or sixty pounds less than the smallest Career. Now I smile. Hows everything with you? I call down cheerfully. This takes them aback, but I know

the crowd will love it. Well enough, says the boy from District 2. Yourself? Its been a bit warm for my taste, I say. I can almost hear the laughter from the Capitol. The airs better up here. Why dont you come on up? Think I will, says the same boy. Here, take this, Cato, says the girl from District 1, and she offers him the silver bow and sheath of arrows. My bow! My arrows! Just the sight of them makes me so angry I want to scream, at myself, at that traitor Peeta for distracting me from having them. I try to make eye contact with him now, but he seems to be intentionally avoiding my gaze as he polishes his knife with the edge

of his shirt. No, says Cato, pushing away the bow. Ill do better with my sword. I can see the weapon, a short, heavy blade at his belt. I give Cato time to hoist himself into the tree before I begin to climb again. Gale always says I remind him of a squirrel the way I can scurry up even the slenderest limb. Part of its my weight, but part of its practice. You have to know where to place your hands and feet. Im another thirty feet in the air when I hear the crack and look down to see Cato flailing as he and a branch go down. He hits the ground hard and Im hoping he possibly broke his neck

when he gets back to his feet, swearing like a fiend. The girl with the arrows, Glimmer I hear someone call her ugh, the names the people in District 1 give their children are so ridiculous anyway Glimmer scales the tree until the branches begin to crack under her feet and then has the good sense to stop. Im at least eighty feet high now. She tries to shoot me and its immediately evident that shes incompetent with a bow. One of the arrows gets lodged in the tree near me though and Im able to seize it. I wave it teasingly above her head, as if this was the sole purpose of retrieving it, when actually I mean to use it if I ever get the chance. I could kill them, everyone of them, if those silver weapons were in my hands. The Careers regroup on the ground and I can hear them growling conspiratorially among themselves, furious I have made them look foolish. But twilight has arrived and their window of attack on me is closing. Finally, I hear Peeta say harshly, Oh, let her stay up there. Its not like shes going anywhere. Well deal with her in the morning. Well, hes right about one thing. Im going nowhere. All the relief from the pool water has gone, leaving me to feel the full potency of my burns. I scoot down to a fork in the tree and clumsily prepare for bed. Put on my jacket. Lay out my sleeping bed. Belt myself in and try to keep from

moaning. The heat of the bags too much for my leg. I cut a slash in the fabric and hang my calf out in the open air. I drizzle water on the wound, my hands. All my bravado is gone. Im weak from pain and hunger but cant bring myself to eat. Even if I can last the night, what will the morning bring? I stare into the foliage trying to will myself to rest, but the burns forbid it. Birds are settling down for the night, singing lullabies to their young. Night creatures emerge. An owl hoots. The faint scent of a skunk cuts through the smoke. The eyes of some animal peer at me from the neighboring tree a possum maybe catching the firelight from the Careers torches. Suddenly, Im up on one elbow. Those are no possums eyes, I know their glassy reflection too well. In fact, those are not animal eyes at all. In the last dim rays of light, I make her out, watching me silently from between the branches. Rue. How long has she been here? The whole time probably. Still and unobserved as the action unfolded beneath her. Perhaps she headed up her tree

shortly before I did, hearing the pack was so close. For a while we hold each others gaze. Then, without even rustling a leaf, her little hand slides into the open and

points to something above my head.
14.

My eyes follow the line of her finger up into the foliage above me. At first, I have no idea what shes pointing to, but then, about fifteen feet up, I make out the vague shape in the dimming light. But of . . . Of what? Some sort of animal? It looks about the size of a raccoon, but it hangs from the bottom of a branch, swaying ever so slightly. Theres something else. Among the familiar evening sounds of the woods, my ears register a low hum. Then I know. Its a wasp nest. Fear shoots through me, but I have enough sense to keep still. After all, I dont know what kind of wasp lives there. It could be the ordinary leave-us-alone-and-well-leave-you-alone type. But these are the Hunger Games, and ordinary isnt the norm. More likely they will be one of the Capitols muttations, tracker jackers. Like the jabberjays, these killer wasps were spawned in a lab and strategically placed, like land mines, around the districts during the war. Larger than regular wasps, they have a distinctive solid gold body and a

sting that raises a lump the size of a plum on contact. Most people cant tolerate more than a few stings. Some die at once. If you live, the hallucinations brought on by the venom have actually driven people to madness. And theres another thing, these wasps will hunt down anyone who disturbs their nest and attempt to kill them. Thats where the tracker part of the name comes from. After the war, the Capitol destroyed all the nests surrounding their city, but the ones near the districts were left untouched. Another reminder of our weakness, I suppose, just like the Hunger Games. Another reason to keep inside the fence of District 12. When Gale and I come across a tracker jacker nest, we immediately head in the opposite direction. So is that what hangs above me? I look back to Rue for help, but shes melted into her tree. Given my circumstances, I guess it doesnt matter what type of wasp nest it is. Im wounded and trapped. Darkness has given me a brief reprieve, but by the time the sun rises, the Careers will have formulated a plan to kill me. Theres no way they could do otherwise after Ive made them look so stupid. That nest may be the sole option I have left. If I can drop it down on them, I may be able to escape. But Ill risk my life in the process. Of course, Ill never be able to get in close enough to the actual nest to

cut it free. Ill have to saw off the branch at the trunk and send the whole thing down. The serrated portion of my knife should be able to manage that. But can my hands? And will the vibration from the sawing raise the swarm? And what if the Careers figure out what Im doing and move their camp? That would defeat the whole purpose. I realize that the best chance Ill have to do the sawing without drawing notice will be during the

anthem. That could begin any time. I drag myself out of my bag, make sure my knife is secured in my belt, and begin to make my way up the tree. This in itself is dangerous since the branches are becoming precariously thin even for me, but I persevere. When I reach the limb that supports the nest, the humming becomes more distinctive. But its still oddly subdued if these are tracker jackers. Its the smoke, I think. Its sedated them. This was the one defense the rebels found to battle the wasps. The seal of the Capitol shines above me and the anthem blares out. Its now or never, I think, and begin to saw. Blisters burst on my right hand as I awkwardly drag the knife back and forth. Once Ive got a groove, the work requires less effort but is almost

more than I can handle. I grit my teeth and saw away occasionally glancing at the sky to register that there were no deaths today. Thats all right. The audience will be sated seeing me injured and treed and the pack below me. But the anthems running out and Im only three quarters of the way through the wood when the music ends, the sky goes dark, and Im forced to stop. Now what? I could probably finish off the job by sense of feel but that may not be the smartest plan. If the wasps are too groggy, if the nest catches on its way down, if I try to escape, this could all be a deadly waste of time. Better, I think, to sneak up here at dawn and send the nest into my enemies. In the faint light of the Careers torches, I inch back down to my fork to find the best surprise Ive ever had. Sitting on my sleeping bag is a small plastic pot attached to a silver parachute. My first gift from a sponsor! Haymitch must have had it sent in during the anthem. The pot easily fits in the palm of my hand. What can it be? Not food surely. I unscrew the lid and I know by the scent that its medicine. Cautiously, I probe the surface of the ointment. The throbbing in my fingertip vanishes. Oh, Haymitch, I whisper. Thank you. He has not abandoned me. Not left me to fend entirely for myself. The cost of this medicine must be astronomical. Probably

not one but many sponsors have contributed to buy this one tiny pot. To me, it is priceless. I dip two fingers in the jar and gently spread the balm over my calf. The effect is almost magical, erasing the pain on contact, leaving a pleasant cooling sensation behind. This is no herbal concoction that my mother grinds up out of woodland plants, its high-tech medicine brewed up in the Capitols labs. When my calf is treated, I rub a thin layer into my hands. After wrapping the pot in the parachute, I nestle it safely away in my pack. Now that the pain has eased, its all I can do to reposition myself in my bag before I plunge into sleep. A bird perched just a few feet from me alerts me that a new day is dawning. In the gray morning light, I examine my hands. The medicine has transformed all the angry red patches to a soft baby-skin pink. My leg still feels inflamed, but that burn was far deeper.

I apply another coat of medicine and quietly pack up my gear. Whatever happens, Im going to have to move and move fast. I also make myself eat a cracker and a strip of beef and drink a few cups of water. Almost nothing stayed in my stomach yesterday, and Im already starting to feel the effects of hunger. Below me, I

can see the Career pack and Peeta asleep on the ground. By her position, leaning up against the trunk of the tree, Id guess Glimmer was supposed to be on guard, but fatigue overcame her. My eyes squint as they try to penetrate the tree next to me, but I cant make out Rue. Since she tipped me off, it only seems fair to warn her. Besides, if Im going to die today, its Rue I want to win. Even if it means a little extra food for my family, the idea of Peeta being crowned victor is unbearable. I call Rues name in a hushed whisper and the eyes appear, wide and alert, at once. She points up to the nest again. I hold up my knife and make a sawing motion. She nods and disappears. Theres a rustling in a nearby tree. Then the same noise again a bit farther off. I realize shes leaping from tree to tree. Its all I can do not to laugh out loud. Is this what she showed the Gamemakers? I imagine her flying around the training equipment never touching the floor. She should have gotten at least a ten. Rosy streaks are breaking through in the east. I cant afford to wait any longer. Compared to the agony of last nights climb, this one is a cinch. At the tree limb that holds the nest, I position the knife in the groove and Im about to draw the teeth across the wood when I see something moving. There, on the nest. The bright gold

gleam of a tracker jacker lazily making its way across the papery gray surface. No question, its acting a little subdued, but the wasp is up and moving and that means the others will be out soon as well. Sweat breaks out on the palms of my hands, beading up through the ointment, and I do my best to pat them dry on my shirt. If I dont get through this branch in a matter of seconds, the entire swarm could emerge and attack me. Theres no sense in putting it off. I take a deep breath, grip the knife handle and bear down as hard as I can. Back, forth, back, forth! The tracker jackers begin to buzz and I hear them coming out. Back, forth, back, forth! A stabbing pain shoots through my knee and I know one has found me and the others will be honing in. Back, forth, back, forth. And just as the knife cuts through, I shove the end of the branch as far away from me as I can. It crashes down through the lower branches, snagging temporarily on a few but then twisting free until it smashes with a thud on the ground. The nest bursts open like an egg, and a furious swarm of tracker jackers takes to the air. I feel a second sting on the cheek, a third on my neck, and their venom almost immediately makes me woozy. I cling to the tree with one arm while I rip the barbed stingers out of my flesh. Fortunately, only these three tracker jackers had

identified me before the nest went down. The rest of the insects have targeted their enemies on the ground. Its mayhem. The Careers have woken to a full-scale tracker jacker attack. Peeta and a few others have the sense to drop everything and bolt. I can hear cries of To the lake! To the lake! and know they hope to evade the wasps by taking to the water. It must be close if they think they can outdistance the furious insects. Glimmer and another girl, the one from District 4, are not so lucky. They receive multiple stings before theyre even out of my view. Glimmer appears to go completely mad, shrieking and trying to bat the wasps off with her bow, which is pointless. She calls to the others for help but, of course, no one returns. The girl from District 4 staggers out of sight, although I wouldnt bet on her making it to the lake. I watch Glimmer fall, twitch hysterically around on the ground for a few minutes, and then go still. The nest is nothing but an empty shell. The wasps have vanished in pursuit of the others. I dont think theyll return, but I dont want to risk it. I scamper down the tree and hit the ground running in the opposite direction of the lake. The poison from the stingers makes me wobbly, but I find my way back to my own little pool and submerge myself in the water, just in case any wasps are still on my trail.

After about five minutes, I drag myself onto the rocks. People have not exaggerated the effects of the tracker jacker stings. Actually, the one on my knee is closer to an orange than a plum in size. A foul-smelling green liquid oozes from the places where I pulled out the stingers. The swelling. The pain. The ooze. Watching Glimmer twitching to death on the ground. Its a lot to handle before the sun has even cleared the horizon. I dont want to think about what Glimmer must look like now. Her body disfigured. Her swollen fingers stiffening around the bow . . . The bow! Somewhere in my befuddled mind one thought connects to another and Im on my feet, teetering through the trees back to Glimmer. The bow. The arrows. I must get them. I havent heard the cannons fire yet, so perhaps Glimmer is in some sort of coma, her heart still struggling against the wasp venom. But once it stops and the cannon signals her death, a hovercraft will move in and retrieve her body, taking the only bow and sheath of arrows Ive seen out of the Games for good. And I refuse to let them slip through my fingers again! I reach Glimmer just as the cannon fires. The tracker jackers have vanished. This girl, so breathtakingly beautiful in her golden dress the night of the interviews, is unrecognizable. Her features eradicated, her

limbs three times their normal size. The stinger lumps have begun to explode, spewing putrid green liquid around her. I have to break several of what used to be her fingers with a stone to free the bow. The sheath of arrows is pinned under her back. I try to roll over her body by pulling on one arm, but the flesh disintegrates

in my hands and I fall back on the ground. Is this real? Or have the hallucinations begun? I squeeze my eyes tight and try to breathe through my mouth, ordering myself not to become sick. Breakfast must stay down, it might be days before I can hunt again. A second cannon fires and Im guessing the girl from District 4 has just died. I hear the birds fall silent and then one give the warning call, which means a hovercraft is about to appear. Confused, I think its for Glimmer, although this doesnt quite make sense because Im still in the picture, still fighting for the arrows. I lurch back onto my knees and the trees around me begin to spin in circles. In the middle of the sky, I spot the hovercraft. I throw myself over Glimmers body as if to protect it but then I see the girl from District 4 being lifted into the air and vanishing. Do this! I command myself. Clenching my jaw, I dig my hands under

Glimmers body, get a hold on what must be her rib cage, and force her onto her stomach. I cant help it, Im hyperventilating now, the whole thing is so nightmarish and Im losing my grasp on whats real. I tug on the silver sheath of arrows, but its caught on something, her shoulder blade, something, and finally yank it free. Ive just encircled the sheath with my arms when I hear the footsteps, several pairs, coming through the underbrush, and I realize the Careers have come back. Theyve come back to kill me or get their weapons or both. But its too late to run. I pull a slimy arrow from the sheath and try to position it on the bowstring but instead of one string I see three and the stench from the stings is so repulsive I cant do it. I cant do it. I cant do it. Im helpless as the first hunter crashes through the trees, spear lifted, poised to throw. The shock on Peetas face makes no sense to me. I wait for the blow. Instead his arm drops to his side. What are you still doing here? he hisses at me. I stare uncomprehendingly as a trickle of water drips off a sting under his ear. His whole body starts sparkling as if hes been dipped in dew. Are you mad? Hes prodding me with the shaft of the spear now. Get up! Get up! I rise, but hes still pushing at me. What? What is going on? He shoves me away from him hard. Run! he screams. Run!

Behind him, Cato slashes his way through the brush. Hes sparkling wet, too, and badly stung under one eye. I catch the gleam of sunlight on his sword and do as Peeta says. Holding tightly to my bow and arrows, banging into trees that appear out of nowhere, tripping and falling as I try to keep my balance. Back past my pool and into unfamiliar woods. The world begins to bend in alarming ways. A butterfly balloons to the size of a house then shatters into a million stars. Trees transform to blood and splash down over my boots. Ants begin to crawl out of the blisters on my hands and I cant shake them free. Theyre climbing up my arms, my neck. Someones screaming, a long high pitched scream that never breaks for breath. I have a vague idea

it might be me. I trip and fall into a small pit lined with tiny orange bubbles that hum like the tracker jacker nest. Tucking my knees up to my chin, I wait for death. Sick and disoriented, Im able to form only one thought: Peeta Mellark just saved my life. Then the ants bore into my eyes and I black out.

15. I enter a nightmare from which I wake repeatedly only to find a greater terror awaiting me. All the things I dread most, all the things I dread for others manifest in such vivid detail I cant help but believe theyre real. Each time I wake, I think, At last, this is over, but it isnt. Its only the beginning of a new chapter of torture. How many ways do I watch Prim die? Relive my fathers last moments? Feel my own body ripped apart? This is the nature of the tracker jacker venom, so carefully created to target the place where fear lives in your brain. When I finally do come to my senses, I lie still, waiting for the next onslaught of imagery. But eventually I accept that the poison must have finally worked its way out of my system, leaving my body wracked and feeble. Im still lying on my side, locked in the fetal position. I lift a hand to my eyes to find them sound, untouched by ants that never existed. Simply stretching out my limbs requires an enormous effort. So many parts of me hurt, it doesnt seem worthwhile taking inventory of them. Very, very slowly I manage to sit up. Im in a shallow hole, not filled with the humming orange bubbles of my hallucination but with old, dead leaves. My clothings damp, but I dont know whether pond water, dew, rain, or sweat is the cause. For a long time, all I can do is take tiny sips from my bottle

and watch a beetle crawl up the side of a honeysuckle bush. How long have I been out? It was morning when I lost reason. Now its afternoon. But the stiffness in my joints suggests more than a day has passed, even two possibly. If so, Ill have no way of knowing which tributes survived that tracker jacker attack. Not Glimmer or the girl from District 4. But there was the boy from District 1, both tributes from District 2, and Peeta. Did they die from the stings? Certainly if they lived, their last days must have been as horrid as my own. And what about Rue? Shes so small, it wouldnt take much venom to do her in. But then again . . . The tracker jackers wouldve had to catch her, and she had a good head start. A foul, rotten taste pervades my mouth, and the water has little effect on it. I drag myself over to the honeysuckle bush and pluck a flower. I gently pull the stamen through the blossom and set the drop of nectar on my tongue. The sweetness spreads through my mouth, down my throat, warming my veins with memories of summer, and my home woods and Gales presence beside me. For some reason, our discussion from that last morning comes back to me. We could do it, you know. What? Leave the district. Run off. Live in the woods. You and I, we could make it. And suddenly, Im not thinking of

Gale but of Peeta and . . .

Peeta! He saved my life! I think. Because by the time we met up, I couldnt tell what was real and what the tracker jacker venom had caused me to imagine. But if he did, and my instincts tell me he did, what for? Is he simply working the Lover Boy angle he initiated at the interview? Or was he actually trying to protect me? And if he was, what was he doing with those Careers in the first place? None of it makes sense. I wonder what Gale made of the incident for a moment and then I push the whole thing out of my mind because for some reason Gale and Peeta do not coexist well together in my thoughts. So I focus on the one really good thing thats happened since I landed in the arena. I have a bow and arrows! A full dozen arrows if you count the one I retrieved in the tree. They bear no trace of the noxious green slime that came from Glimmers body which leads me to believe that might not have been wholly real but they have a fair amount of dried blood on them. I can clean them later, but I do take a minute to shoot a few into a nearby tree. They are more like the weapons in the Training Center than my ones at home, but who cares? That I can work with. The

weapons give me an entirely new perspective on the Games. I know I have tough opponents left to face. But I am no longer merely prey that runs and hides or takes desperate measures. If Cato broke through the trees right now, I wouldnt flee, Id shoot. I find Im actually anticipating the moment with pleasure. But first, I have to get some strength back in my body. Im very dehydrated again and my water supply is dangerously low. The little padding I was able to put on by gorging myself during prep time in the Capitol is gone, plus several more pounds as well. My hip bones and ribs are more prominent than I remember them being since those awful months after my fathers death. And then there are my wounds to contend with burns, cuts, and bruises from smashing into the trees, and three tracker jacker stings, which are as sore and swollen as ever. I treat my burns with the ointment and try dabbing a bit on my stings as well, but it has no effect on them. My mother knew a treatment for them, some type of leaf that could draw out the poison, but she seldom had cause to use it, and I dont even remember its name let alone its appearance. Water first, I think. You can hunt along the way now. Its easy to see the direction I came from by the path of destruction my crazed body made through the foliage. So I walk off in the other

direction, hoping my enemies still lie locked in the surreal world of tracker jacker venom. I cant move too quickly, my joints reject any abrupt motions. But I establish the slow hunters tread I use when tracking game. Within a few minutes, I spot a rabbit and make my first kill with the bow and arrow. Its not my usual clean shot through the eye, but Ill take it. After about an hour, I find a stream, shallow but wide, and more than sufficient for my needs. The suns hot and severe, so while I

wait for my water to purify I strip down to my underclothes and wade into the mild current. Im filthy from head to toe, I try splashing myself but eventually just lay down in the water for a few minutes, letting it wash off the soot and blood and skin that has started to peel off my burns. After rinsing out my clothes and hanging them on bushes to dry, I sit on the bank in the sun for a bit, untangling my hair with my fingers. My appetite returns and I eat a cracker and a strip of beef. With a handful of moss, I polish the blood from my silver weapons. Refreshed, I treat my burns again, braid back my hair, and dress in the damp clothes, knowing the sun will dry them soon enough. Following the stream against its current seems the smartest course of

action. Im traveling uphill now, which I prefer, with a source of fresh water not only for myself but possible game. I easily take out a strange bird that must be some form of wild turkey. Anyway, it looks plenty edible to me. By late afternoon, I decide to build a small fire to cook the meat, betting that dusk will help conceal the smoke and I can quench the fire by nightfall. I clean the game, taking extra care with the bird, but theres nothing alarming about it. Once the feathers are plucked, its no bigger than a chicken, but its plump and firm. Ive just placed the first lot over the coals when I hear the twig snap. In one motion, I turn to the sound, bringing the bow and arrow to my shoulder. Theres no one there. No one I can see anyway. Then I spot the tip of a childs boot just peeking out from behind the trunk of a tree. My shoulders relax and I grin. She can move through the woods like a shadow, you have to give her that. How else could she have followed me? The words come out of my mouth before I can stop them. You know, theyre not the only ones who can form alliances, I say. For a moment, no response. Then one of Rues eyes edges around the trunk. You want me for an ally? Why not? You saved me with those tracker jackers. Youre smart enough to still be alive. And I cant seem to shake you anyway, I say. She blinks at me,

trying to decide. You hungry? I can see her swallow hard, her eye flickering to the meat. Come on then, Ive had two kills today. Rue tentatively steps out into the open. I can fix your stings. Can you? I ask. How? She digs in the pack she carries and pulls out a handful of leaves. Im almost certain theyre the ones my mother uses. Whered you find those? Just around. We all carry them when we work in the orchards. They left a lot of nests there, says Rue. There are a lot here, too. Thats right. Youre District Eleven. Agriculture, I say. Orchards, huh? That must be how you can fly around the trees like youve got wings. Rue smiles. Ive landed on one of the few things shell admit pride in. Well, come on, then. Fix me up. I plunk down by the fire and roll up my pant leg to reveal the sting on my knee. To my surprise, Rue places the handful of leaves into her mouth and begins to chew

them. My mother would use other methods, but its not like we have a lot of options. After a minute or so, Rue presses a gloppy green wad of chewed leaves and spit on my knee. Ohhh. The sound comes out of my mouth before I can stop it. Its as if the leaves are actually leaching the pain right out of the sting. Rue gives a giggle.

Lucky you had the sense to pull the stingers out or youd be a lot worse. Do my neck! Do my cheek! I almost beg. Rue stuffs another handful of leaves in her mouth, and soon Im laughing because the relief is so sweet. I notice a long burn on Rues forearm. Ive got something for that. I set aside my weapons and anoint her arm with the burn medicine. You have good sponsors, she says longingly. Have you gotten anything yet? I ask. She shakes her head. You will, though. Watch. The closer we get to the end, the more people will realize how clever you are. I turn the meat over. You werent joking, about wanting me for an ally? she asks. No, I meant it, I say. I can almost hear Haymitch groaning as I team up with this wispy child. But I want her. Because shes a survivor, and I trust her, and why not admit it? She reminds me of Prim. Okay, she says, and holds out her hand. We shake. Its a deal. Of course, this kind of deal can only be temporary, but neither of us mentions that. Rue contributes a big handful of some sort of starchy root to the meal. Roasted over the fire, they have the sharp sweet taste of a parsnip. She recognizes the bird, too, some wild thing they call a groosling in her district. She says sometimes a flock will wander into the orchard and they get a decent lunch that day. For a while, all conversation stops as

we fill our stomachs. The groosling has delicious meal thats so fatty, the grease drips down your face when you bite into it. Oh, says Rue with a sigh. Ive never had a whole leg to myself before. Ill bet she hasnt. Ill bet meat hardly ever comes her way. Take the other, I say. Really? she asks. Take whatever you want. Now that Ive got a bow and arrows, I can get more. Plus Ive got snares. I can show you how to set them, I say. Rue still looks uncertainly at the leg. Oh, take it, I say, putting the drumstick in her hands. It will only keep a few days anyway, and weve got the whole bird plus the rabbit. Once shes got hold of it, her appetite wins out and she takes a huge mouthful. Id have thought, in District Eleven, youd have a bit more to eat than us. You know, since you grow the food, I say. Rues eyes widen. Oh, no, were not allowed to eat the crops. They arrest you or something? I ask. They whip you and make everyone else watch, says Rue. The mayors very strict about it. I can tell by her expression that its not that uncommon an occurrence. A public whippings a rare thing in District 12, although occasionally one occurs. Technically, Gale and I could be whipped on a daily basis for poaching in the woods well, technically, we could get a whole lot worse except all the officials buy our meat. Besides, our


mayor, Madges father, doesnt seem to have much taste for such events. Maybe being the least prestigious, poorest, most ridiculed district in the country has its advantages. Such as, being largely ignored by the Capitol as long as we produce our coal quotas. Do you get all the coal you want? Rue asks. No, I answer. Just what we buy and whatever we track in on our boots. They feed us a bit extra during harvest, so that people can keep going longer, says Rue. Dont you have to be in school? I ask. Not during harvest. Everyone works then, says Rue. Its interesting, hearing about her life. We have so little communication with anyone outside our district. In fact, I wonder if the Gamemakers are blocking out our conversation, because even though the information seems harmless, they dont want people in different districts to know about one another. At Rues suggestion, we lay out all our food to plan ahead. Shes seen most of mine, but I add the last couple of crackers and beef strips to the pile. Shes gathered quite a collection of roots, nuts, greens, and even some berries. I roll an unfamiliar berry in my fingers. You sure this is safe? Oh, yes, we have them back home. Ive been eating them for days, she says, popping a handful in her mouth. I tentatively bite into one, and its as good as our blackberries. Taking Rue on as an ally

seems a better choice all the time. We divide up our food supplies, so in case were separated, well both be set for a few days. Apart from the food, Rue has a small water skin, a homemade slingshot, and an extra pair of socks. She also has a sharp shard of rock she uses as a knife. I know its not much, she says as if embarrassed, but I had to get away from the Cornucopia fast. You did just right, I say. When I spread out my gear, she gasps a little when she sees the sunglasses. How did you get those? she asks. In my pack. Theyve been useless so far. They dont block the sun and they make it harder to see, I say with a shrug. These arent for sun, theyre for darkness, exclaims Rue. Sometimes, when we harvest through the night, theyll pass out a few pairs to those of us highest in the trees. Where the torchlight doesnt reach. One time, this boy Martin, he tried to keep his pair. Hid it in his pants. They killed him on the spot. They killed a boy for taking these? I say. Yes, and everyone knew he was no danger. Martin wasnt right in the head. I mean, he still acted like a three-year-old. He just wanted the glasses to play with, says Rue. Hearing this makes me feel like District 12 is some sort of safe haven. Of course, people keel over from starvation all the time, but I cant imagine the Peacekeepers murdering a simpleminded child. Theres a little

girl, one of Greasy Saes grandkids, who wanders around the Hob. Shes not quite right, but shes treated as a sort of pet. People toss her scraps and things. So what do these do? I ask Rue, taking the glasses. They let you see in complete darkness, says Rue. Try them tonight when the sun goes

down. I give Rue some matches and she makes sure I have plenty of leaves in case my stings flare up again. We extinguish our fire and head upstream until its almost nightfall. Where do you sleep? I ask her. In the trees? She nods. In just your jacket? Rue holds up her extra pair of socks. I have these for my hands. I think of how cold the nights have been. You can share my sleeping bag if you want. Well both easily fit. Her face lights up. I can tell this is more than she dared hope for. We pick a fork high in a tree and settle in for the night just as the anthem begins to play. There were no deaths today. Rue, I only woke up today. How many nights did I miss? The anthem should block out our words, but still I whisper. I even take the precaution of covering my lips with my hand. I dont want the audience to know what Im planning to tell her about Peeta. Taking a cue from me, she does the same. Two, she says. The

girls from Districts One and Four are dead. Theres ten of us left. Something strange happened. At least, I think it did. It might have been the tracker jacker venom making me imagine things, I say. You know the boy from my district? Peeta? I think he saved my life. But he was with the Careers. Hes not with them now, she says. Ive spied on their base camp by the lake. They made it back before they collapsed from the stingers. But hes not there. Maybe he did save you and had to run. I dont answer. If, in fact, Peeta did save me, Im in his debt again. And this cant be paid back. If he did, it was all probably just part of his act. You know, to make people think hes in love with me. Oh, says Rue thoughtfully. I didnt think that was an act. Course it is, I say. He worked it out with our mentor. The anthem ends and the sky goes dark. Lets try out these glasses. I pull out the glasses and slip them on. Rue wasnt kidding. I can see everything from the leaves on the trees to a skunk strolling through the bushes a good fifty feet away. I could kill it from here if I had a mind to. I could kill anyone. I wonder who else got a pair of these, I say. The Careers have two pairs. But theyve got everything down by the lake, Rue says. And theyre so strong. Were strong, too, I say. Just in a different way. You are. You can shoot, she says. What can I do? You can feed

yourself. Can they? I ask. They dont need to. They have all those supplies, Rue says. Say they didnt. Say the supplies were gone. How long would they last? I say. I mean, its the Hunger Games, right? But, Katniss, theyre not hungry, says Rue. No, theyre not. Thats the problem, I agree. And for the first time, I have a plan. A plan that isnt motivated by the need for flight and evasion. An offensive plan. I think were going to have to fix that, Rue.

16.

Rue has decided to trust me wholeheartedly. I know this because as soon as the anthem finishes she snuggles up against me and falls asleep. Nor do I have any misgivings about her, as I take no particular precautions. If shed wanted me dead, all she

would have had to do was disappear from that tree without pointing out the tracker jacker nest. Needling me, at the very back of my mind, is the obvious. Both of us cant win these Games. But since the odds are still against either of us surviving, I manage to ignore the thought. Besides, Im distracted by my latest idea about the Careers and their supplies. Somehow Rue and I must find a way to destroy their food. Im pretty sure feeding themselves will be a tremendous struggle. Traditionally, the Career tributes strategy is to get hold of all the food early on and work from there. The years when they have not protected it well one year a pack of hideous reptiles destroyed it, another a Gamemakers flood washed it away those are usually the years that tributes from other districts have won. That the Careers have been better red growing up is actually to their disadvantage, because they dont know how to be hungry. Not the way Rue and I do. But Im too exhausted to begin any detailed plan tonight. My wounds recovering, my mind still a bit foggy from the venom, and the warmth of Rue at my side, her head cradled on my shoulder, have given me a sense of security. I realize, for the first time, how very lonely Ive been in the arena. How comforting the presence of another human being can be. I give in to my drowsiness, resolving that tomorrow the tables will turn. Tomorrow, its the Careers who will have to watch their backs. The boom of the cannon jolts me awake.

The skys streaked with light, the birds already chattering. Rue perches in a branch across from me, her hands cupping something. We wait, listening for more shots, but there arent any. Who do you think that was? I cant help thinking of Peeta. I dont know. It could have been any of the others, says Rue. I guess well know tonight. Whos left again? I ask. The boy from District One. Both tributes from Two. The boy from Three. Thresh and me. And you and Peeta, says Rue. Thats eight. Wait, and the boy from Ten, the one with the bad leg. He makes nine. Theres someone else, but neither of us can remember who it is. I wonder how that last one died, says Rue. No telling. But its good for us. A death should hold the crowd for a bit. Maybe well have time to do something before the Gamemakers decide things have been moving too slowly, I say. Whats in your hands? Breakfast, says Rue. She holds them out revealing two big eggs. What kind are those? I ask. Not sure. Theres a marshy area over that way. Some kind of waterbird, she says. Itd be nice to cook them, but neither of us wants to risk a fire. My guess is the tribute who died today was a victim of the Careers, which means theyve recovered enough to be back in the Games. We each suck out the insides of an egg, eat a rabbit leg and some berries. Its a good breakfast anywhere. Ready to do it? I say, pulling on my pack. Do what? says Rue, but by the way she bounces up, you can tell shes up for whatever I propose. Today we take out the Careers food, I say. Really?

How? You can see the glint of excitement in her eyes. In this way, shes exactly the opposite of Prim for whom adventures are an ordeal. No idea. Come on, well figure out a plan while we hunt, I say. We dont get much hunting done though because Im too busy getting every scrap of information I can out of Rue about the Careers base. Shes only been in to spy on them briefly, but shes observant. They have set up their camp beside the lake. Their supply stash is about thirty yards away. During the day, theyve been leaving another tribute, the boy from District 3, to watch over the supplies. The boy from District Three? I ask. Hes working with them? Yes, he stays at the camp full-time. He got stung, too, when they drew the tracker jackers in by the lake, says Rue. I guess they agreed to let him live if he acted as their guard. But hes not very big. What weapons does he have? I ask. Not much that I could see. A spear. He might be able to hold a few of us off with that, but Thresh could kill

him easily, says Rue. And the foods just out in the open? I say. She nods. Somethings not quite right about that whole setup. I know. But I couldnt tell what exactly, says Rue. Katniss, even if you could get to the food, how would you get rid of it? Burn it. Dump it in the lake. Soak it in fuel. I poke Rue in the belly, just like I would Prim. Eat it! She giggles. Dont worry, Ill think of something. Destroying things is much easier than making them. For a while, we dig roots, we gather berries and greens, we devise a strategy in hushed voices. And I come to know Rue, the oldest of six kids, fiercely protective of her siblings, who gives her rations to the younger ones, who forages in the meadows in a district where the Peacekeepers are far less obliging than ours. Rue, who when you ask her what she loves most in the world, replies, of all things, Music. Music? I say. In our world, I rank music somewhere between hair ribbons and rainbows in terms of usefulness. At least a rainbow gives you a tip about the weather. You have a lot of time for that? We sing at home. At work, too. Thats why I love your pin, she says, pointing to the mockingjay that Ive again forgotten about. You have mockingjays? I ask. Oh, yes. I have a few that are my special friends. We can sing back and forth for hours. They carry messages for me, she says. What do you mean? I say. Im usually up highest, so Im the first to see the flag that signals quitting time. Theres a special little song I do, says Rue. She opens her mouth and sings a little four-note run in a sweet, clear voice. And the mockingjays spread it around the orchard. Thats how everyone knows to knock off, she continues. They can be dangerous though, if you get too near their nests. But you cant blame them for that. I unclasp the pin and hold it out to her. Here, you take it. It has more meaning for you than me. Oh, no, says Rue, closing my fingers back over the pin. I like to see it on you. Thats how I decided I could trust you.

Besides, I have this. She pulls a necklace woven out of some kind of grass from her shirt. On it, hangs a roughly carved wooden star. Or maybe its a flower. Its a good luck charm. Well, its worked so far, I say, pinning the mockingjay back on my shirt. Maybe you should just stick with that. By lunch, we have a plan. By early afternoon, we are poised to carry it out. I help Rue collect and place the wood for the first two campfires, the third shell have time for on her own. We decide to meet afterward at the site where we ate our first meal together. The stream should help guide me back

to it. Before I leave, I make sure Rues well stocked with food and matches. I even insist she take my sleeping bag, in case its not possible to rendezvous by nightfall. What about you? Wont you be cold? she asks. Not if I pick up another bag down by the lake, I say. You know, stealing isnt illegal here, I say with a grin. At the last minute, Rue decides to teach me her mockingjay signal, the one she gives to indicate the days work is done. It might not work. But if you hear the mockingjays singing it, youll know Im okay, only I cant get back right away. Are there many mockingjays here? I ask. Havent you seen them? Theyve got nests everywhere, she says. I have to admit I havent noticed. Okay, then. If all goes according to plan, Ill see you for dinner, I say. Unexpectedly, Rue throws her arms around me. I only hesitate a moment before I hug her back. You be careful, she says to me. You, too, I say. I turn and head back to the stream, feeling somehow worried. About Rue being killed, about Rue not being killed and the two of us being left for last, about leaving Rue alone, about leaving Prim alone back home. No, Prim has my mother and Gale and a baker who has promised she wont go hungry. Rue has only me. Once I reach the stream, I have only to follow it downhill to the place I initially picked it up after the tracker jacker attack. I have to be cautious as I move along the water though, because I find my thoughts preoccupied with unanswered questions, most of which concern Peeta. The cannon that fired early this morning, did that signify his death? If so, how did he die? At the hand of a Career? And was that in revenge for letting me live? I struggle again to remember that moment over Glimmers body, when he burst through the trees. But just the fact that he was sparkling leads me to doubt everything that happened. I must have been moving very slowly yesterday because I reach the shallow stretch where I took my bath in just a few hours. I stop to replenish my water and add a layer of mud to my backpack. It seems bent on reverting to orange no matter how many times I cover it. My proximity to the Careers camp sharpens my senses, and the closer I get to them, the more guarded I am, pausing frequently to listen for unnatural sounds, an arrow already fitted into the string of my bow. I dont see any other tributes, but I do notice some of the things Rue has mentioned.

Patches of the sweet berries. A bush with the leaves that healed my stings. Clusters of tracker jacker nests in the vicinity of the tree I was trapped in. And here

and there, the black-and-white flash of a mockingjay wing in the branches high over my head. When I reach the tree with the abandoned nest at the foot, I pause a moment, to gather my courage. Rue has given specific instructions on how to reach the best spying place near the lake from this point. Remember, I tell myself. Youre the hunter now, not them. I get a firmer grasp on my bow and go on. I make it to the copse Rue has told me about and again have to admire her cleverness. Its right at the edge of the wood, but the bushy foliage is so thick down low I can easily observe the Career camp without being spotted. Between us lies the flat expanse where the Games began. There are four tributes. The boy from District 1, Cato and the girl from District 2, and a scrawny, ashen-skinned boy who must be from District 3. He made almost no impression on me at all during our time in the Capitol. I can remember almost nothing about him, not his costume, not his training score, not his interview. Even now, as he sits there fiddling with some kind of plastic box, hes easily ignored in the presence of his large and domineering companions. But he must be of some value or they wouldnt have bothered to let him live. Still, seeing him only adds to my sense of unease over why the Careers would possibly leave him as a guard, why they have allowed him to live at all. All four tributes seem to still be recovering from the tracker jacker attack. Even from here, I can see the large swollen lumps on their bodies. They must not have had the sense to remove the stingers, or if they did, not known about the leaves that healed them. Apparently, whatever medicines they found in the Cornucopia have been ineffective. The Cornucopia sits in its original position, but its insides have been picked clean. Most of the supplies, held in crates, burlap sacks, and plastic bins, are piled neatly in a pyramid in what seems a questionable distance from the camp. Others are sprinkled around the perimeter of the pyramid, almost mimicking the layout of supplies around the Cornucopia at the onset of the Games. A canopy of netting that, aside from discouraging birds, seems to be useless shelters the pyramid itself. The whole setup is completely perplexing. The distance, the netting, and the presence of the boy from District 3. One things for sure, destroying those supplies is not going to be as simple as it looks. Some other factor is at play here, and Id better stay put until I figure out what it is. My guess is the pyramid is booby-trapped in some manner. I think of concealed pits, descending nets, a thread that when broken sends a poisonous dart into your heart. Really, the

possibilities are endless. While I am mulling over my options, I hear Cato shout out. Hes pointing up to the woods, far beyond me, and without turning I know

that Rue must have set the first campfire. Wed made sure to gather enough green wood to make the smoke noticeable. The Careers begin to arm themselves at once. An argument breaks out. Its loud enough for me to hear that it concerns whether or not the boy from District 3 should stay or accompany them. Hes coming. We need him in the woods, and his jobs done here anyway. No one can touch those supplies, says Cato. What about Lover Boy? says the boy from District 1. I keep telling you, forget about him. I know where I cut him. Its a miracle he hasnt bled to death yet. At any rate, hes in no shape to raid us, says Cato. So Peeta is out there in the woods, wounded badly. But I am still in the dark on what motivated him to betray the Careers. Come on, says Cato. He thrusts a spear into the hands of the boy from District 3, and they head off in the direction of the fire. The last thing I hear as they enter the woods is Cato saying, When we find her, I kill her in my own way, and no one interferes. Somehow I dont think hes talking about Rue. She didnt drop a nest of acker jackers on him. I stay put for a half an hour or so, trying to figure out what to do about the supplies. The one advantage I have with the bow and arrow is distance. I could send a flaming arrow into the pyramid easily enough Im a good enough shot to get it through those openings in the net but theres no guarantee it would catch. More likely itd just burn itself out and then what? Id have achieved nothing and given them far too much information about myself. That I was here, that I have an accomplice, that I can use the bow and arrow with accuracy. Theres no alternative. Im going to have to get in closer and see if I cant discover what exactly protects the supplies. In fact, Im just about to reveal myself when a movement catches my eye. Several hundred yards to my right, I see someone emerge from the woods. For a second, I think its Rue, but then I recognize Foxface shes the one we couldnt remember this morning creeping out onto the plain. When she decides its safe, she runs for the pyramid, with quick, small steps. Just before she reaches the circle of supplies that have been littered around the pyramid, she stops, searches the ground, and carefully places her feet on a spot. Then she begins to approach the pyramid with strange little hops, sometimes landing on one foot, teetering slightly,

sometimes risking a few steps. At one point, she launches up in the air, over a small barrel and lands poised on her tiptoes. But she overshot slightly, and her momentum throws her forward. I hear her give a sharp squeal as her hands hit the ground, but nothing happens. In a moment, shes regained her feet and continues until she has reached the bulk of the supplies. So, Im right about the booby trap, but its clearly more complex than I had imagined. I was right about the girl, too. How wily is she to have discovered this path into the food and to be able to replicate it so neatly? She fills her

pack, taking a few items from a variety of containers, crackers from a crate, a handful of apples from a burlap sack that hangs suspended from a rope off the side of a bin. But only a handful from each, not enough to tip off that the food is missing. Not enough to cause suspicion. And then shes doing her odd little dance back out of the circle and scampering into the woods again, safe and sound. I realize Im grinding my teeth in frustration. Foxface has confirmed what Id already guessed. But what sort of trap have they laid that requires such dexterity? Has so many trigger points? Why did she squeal so as her hands made contact with the earth? Youd have thought . . . And slowly it begins to dawn on me . . . Youd have thought the very ground was going to explode. Its mined, I whisper. That explains everything. The Careers willingness to leave their supplies, Foxfaces reaction, the involvement of the boy from District 3, where they have the factories, where they make televisions and automobiles and explosives. But where did he get them? In the supplies? Thats not the sort of weapon the Gamemakers usually provide, given that they like to see the tributes draw blood personally. I slip out of the bushes and cross to one of the round metal plates that lifted the tributes into the arena. The ground around it has been dug up and patted back down. The land mines were disabled after the sixty seconds we stood on the plates, but the boy from District 3 must have managed to reactivate them. Ive never seen anyone in the Games do that. I bet it came as a shock even to the Gamemakers. Well, hurray for the boy from District 3 for putting one over on them, but what am I supposed to do now? Obviously, I cant go strolling into that mess without blowing myself sky-high. As for sending in a burning arrow, thats more laughable than ever. The mines are set off by pressure. It doesnt have to be a lot, either. One year, a girl

dropped her token, a small wooden ball, while she was at her plate, and they literally had to scrape bits of her off the ground. My arms pretty good, I might be able to chuck some rocks in there and set off what? Maybe one mine? That could start a chain reaction. Or could it? Would the boy from District 3 have placed the mines in such a way that a single mine would not disturb the others? Thereby protecting the supplies but ensuring the death of the invader. Even if I only blew up one mine, Id draw the Careers back down on me for sure. And anyway, what am I thinking? Theres that net, clearly strung to deflect any such attack. Besides, what Id really need is to throw about thirty rocks in there at once, setting off a big chain reaction, demolishing the whole lot. I glance back up at the woods. The smoke from Rues second fire is wafting toward the sky. By now, the Careers have probably begun to suspect some sort of trick. Time is running out. There is a solution to this, I know there is, if I can only focus hard enough. I stare at the pyramid, the

bins, the crates, too heavy to topple over with an arrow. Maybe one contains cooking oil, and the burning arrow idea is reviving when I realize I could end uplosing all twelve of my arrows and not get a direct hit on an oil bin, since Id just be guessing. Im genuinely thinking of trying to re-create Foxfaces trip up to the pyramid in hopes of finding a new means of destruction when my eyes light on the burlap bag of apples. I could sever the rope in one shot, didnt I do as much in the Training Center? Its a big bag, but it still might only be good for one explosion. If only I could free the apples themselves . . . I know what to do. I move into range and give myself three arrows to get the job done. I place my feet carefully, block out the rest of the world as I take meticulous aim, The first arrow tears through the side of the bag near the top, leaving a split in the burlap. The second widens it to a gaping hole. I can see the first apple teetering when I let the third arrow go, catching the torn flap of burlap and ripping it from the bag. For a moment, everything seems frozen in time. Then the apples spill to the ground and Im blown backward into the air.

17.

The impact with the hard-packed earth of the plain knocks the wind out of me.

My backpack does little to soften the blow. Fortunately my quiver has caught in the crook of my elbow, sparing both itself and my shoulder, and my bow is locked in my grasp. The ground still shakes with explosions. I cant hear them. I cant hear anything at the moment. But the apples must have set off enough mines, causing debris to activate the others. I manage to shield my face with my arms as shattered bits of matter, some of it burning, rain down around me. An acrid smoke fills the air, which is not the best remedy for someone trying to regain the ability to breathe. After about a minute, the ground stops vibrating. I roll on my side and allow myself a moment of satisfaction the sight of the smoldering wreckage that was recently the pyramid. The Careers arent likely to salvage anything out of that. Id better get out of here, I think. Theyll be making a beeline for the place. But once Im on my feet, I realize escape may not be so simple. Im dizzy. Not the slightly wobbly kind, but the kind that sends the trees swooping around you and causes the earth to move in waves under your feet. I take a few steps and somehow wind up on my hands and knees. I wait a few minutes to let it pass, but it doesnt. Panic begins to set in. I cant stay here. Flight is essential. But I can neither walk nor hear. I place a hand to my left ear, the

one that was turned toward the blast, and it comes away bloody. Have I gone deaf from the explosion? The idea frightens me. I rely as much on my ears as my eyes as a hunter, maybe more at times. But I cant let my fear show. Absolutely, positively, I am live on every screen in Panem. No blood trails, I tell myself, and manage to pull my hood up over my head, tie the cord under my chin with uncooperative

fingers. That should help soak up the blood. I cant walk, but can I crawl? I move forward tentatively. Yes, if I go very slowly, I can crawl. Most of the woods will offer insufficient cover. My only hope is to make it back to Rues copse and conceal myself in greenery. I cant get caught out here on my hands and knees in the open. Not only will I face death, its sure to be a long and painful one at Catos hand. The thought of Prim having to watch that keeps me doggedly inching my way toward the hideout. Another blast knocks me flat on my face. A stray mine, set off by some collapsing crate. This happens twice more. Im reminded of those last few kernels that burst when Prim and I pop corn over the fire at home. To say I make it in the nick of time is an understatement. I have literally just dragged myself into the tangle of hushes at

the base of the trees when theres Cato, barreling onto the plain, soon followed by his companions. His rage is so extreme it might be comical so people really do tear out their hair and beat the ground with their fists if I didnt know that it was aimed at me, at what I have done to him. Add to that my proximity, my inability to run or defend myself, and in fact, the whole thing has me terrified. Im glad my hiding place makes it impossible for the cameras to get a close shot of me because Im biting my nails like theres no tomorrow. Gnawing off the last bits of nail polish, trying to keep my teeth from chattering. The boy from District 3 throws stones into the ruins and must have declared all the mines activated because the Careers are approaching the wreckage. Cato has finished the first phase of his tantrum and takes out his anger on the smoking remains by kicking open various containers. The other tributes are poking around in the mess, looking for anything to salvage, but theres nothing. The boy from District 3 has done his job too well. This idea must occur to Cato, too, because he turns on the boy and appears to be shouting at him. The boy from District 3 only has time to turn and run before Cato catches him in a headlock from behind. I can see the muscles ripple in Catos arms as he sharply jerks the boys head to the side.

Its that quick. The death of the boy from District 3. The other two Careers seem to be trying to calm Cato down. I can tell he wants to return to the woods, but they keep pointing at the sky, which puzzles me until I realize, Of course. They think whoever set off the explosions is dead. They dont know about the arrows and the apples. They assume the booby trap was faulty, but that the tribute who blew up the supplies was killed doing it. If there was a cannon shot, it could have been easily lost in the subsequent explosions. The shattered remains of the thief removed by hovercraft. They retire to the far side of the lake to allow the Gamemakers to retrieve the body of the boy from District 3. And they wait. I suppose a cannon goes off. A hovercraft appears and takes the dead boy. The sun dips below

the horizon. Night falls. Up in the sky, I see the seal and know the anthem must have begun. A moment of darkness. They show the boy from District 3. They show the boy from District 10, who must have died this morning. Then the seal reappears. So, now they know. The bomber survived. In the seals light, I can see Cato and the girl from District 2 put on their night-vision glasses. The boy from District 1 ignites a

tree branch for a torch, illuminating the grim determination on all their faces. The Careers stride back into the woods to hunt. The dizziness has subsided and while my left ear is still deafened, I can hear a ringing in my right, which seems a good sign. Theres no point in leaving my hiding place, though. Im about as safe as I can be, here at the crime scene. They probably think the bomber has a two- or three-hour lead on them. Still its a long time before I risk moving. The first thing I do is dig out my own glasses and put them on, which relaxes me a little, to have at least one of my hunters senses working. I drink some water and wash the blood from my ear. Fearing the smell of meat will draw unwanted predators fresh blood is bad enough I make a good meal out of the greens and roots and berries Rue and I gathered today. Where is my little ally? Did she make it back to the rendezvous point? Is she worried about me? At least, the sky has shown were both alive. I run through the surviving tributes on my fingers. The boy from 1, both from 2, Foxface, both from 11 and 12. Just eight of us. The betting must be getting really hot in the Capitol. Theyll be doing special features on each of us now. Probably interviewing our friends and families. Its been a long time since a tribute from District 12 made it into the top eight. And now there are two

of us. Although from what Cato said, Peetas on his way out. Not that Cato is the final word on anything. Didnt he just lose his entire stash of supplies? Let the Seventy-fourth Hunger Games begin, Cato, I think. Let them begin for real. A cold breeze has sprung up. I reach for my sleeping bag before I remember I left it with Rue. I was supposed to pick up another one, but what with the mines and all, I forgot. I begin to shiver. Since roosting overnight in a tree isnt sensible anyway, I scoop out a hollow under the bushes and cover myself with leaves and pine needles. Im still freezing. I lay my sheet of plastic over my upper body and position my backpack to block the wind. Its a little better. I begin to have more sympathy for the girl from District 8 that lit the fire that first night. But now its me who needs to grit my teeth and tough it out until morning. More leaves, more pine needles. I pull my arms inside my jacket and tuck my knees up to my chest. Somehow, I drift off to sleep. When I open my eyes, the world looks slightly fractured, and it takes a minute to realize that the sun must be well up and the glasses fragmenting my vision. As I sit up and remove them, I hear a laugh somewhere near


the lake and freeze. The laughs distorted, but the fact that it registered at all means I must be regaining my hearing. Yes, my right ear can hear again, although its still ringing. As for my left ear, well, at least the bleeding has stopped. I peer through the bushes, afraid the Careers have returned, trapping me here for an indefinite time. No, its Foxface, standing in the rubble of the pyramid and laughing. Shes smarter than the Careers, actually finding a few useful items in the ashes. A metal pot. A knife blade. Im perplexed by her amusement until I realize that with the Careers stores eliminated, she might actually stand a chance. Just like the rest of us. It crosses my mind to reveal myself and enlist her as a second ally against that pack. But I rule it out. Theres something about that sly grin that makes me sure that befriending Foxface would ultimately get me a knife in the back. With that in mind, this might be an excellent time to shoot her. But shes heard something, not me, because her head turns away, toward the drop-off, and she sprints for the woods. I wait. No one, nothing shows up. Still, if Foxface thought it was dangerous, maybe its time for me to get out of here, too. Besides, Im eager to tell Rue about the pyramid. Since Ive no idea where the Careers are, the route back by the stream seems as good as any. I

hurry, loaded bow in one hand, a hunk of cold groosling in the other, because Im famished now, and not just for leaves and berries but for the fat and protein in the meat. The trip to the stream is uneventful. Once there, I refill my water and wash, taking particular care with my injured ear. Then I travel uphill using the stream as a guide. At one point, I find boot prints in the mud along the bank. The Careers have been here, but not for a while. The prints are deep because they were made in soft mud, but now theyre nearly dry in the hot sun. I havent been careful enough about my own tracks, counting on a light tread and the pine needles to conceal my prints. Now I strip off my boots and socks and go barefoot up the bed of the stream. The cool water has an invigorating effect on my body, my spirits. I shoot two fish, easy pickings in this slow-moving stream, and go ahead and eat one raw even though Ive just had the groosling. The second Ill save for Rue. Gradually, subtly, the ringing in my right ear diminishes until its gone entirely. I find myself pawing at my left ear periodically, trying to clean away whatever deadens its ability to collect sounds. If theres improvement, its undetectable. I cant adjust to deafness in the ear. It makes me feel off-balanced and defenseless to my left. Blind even. My head keeps turning to

the injured side, as my right ear tries to compensate for the wall of nothingness where yesterday there was a constant flow of information. The more time that passes, the less hopeful I am that this is an injury that will heal. When I reach the site of our first meeting, I feel certain its been

undisturbed. Theres no sign of Rue, not on the ground or in the trees. This is odd. By now she should have returned, as its midday. Undoubtedly, she spent the night in a tree somewhere. What else could she do with no light and the Careers with their night-vision glasses tramping around the woods. And the third fire she was supposed to set although I forgot to check for it last night was the farthest from our site of all. Shes probably just being cautious about making her way back. I wish shed hurry, because I dont want to hang around here too long. I want to spend the afternoon traveling to higher ground, hunting as we go. But theres nothing really for me to do but wait. I wash the blood out of my jacket and hair and clean my ever-growing list of wounds. The burns are much better but I use a bit of medicine on them anyway. The main thing to worry about now is keeping out infection. I go ahead andeat the second fish. It isnt going to last long in this hot sun, but it should be easy enough to spear a few more for Rue. If she would just show up. Feeling too vulnerable on the ground with my lopsided hearing, I scale a tree to wait. If the Careers show up, this will be a fine place to shoot them from. The sun moves slowly. I do things to pass the time. Chew leaves and apply them to my stings that are deflated but still tender. Comb through my damp hair with my fingers and braid it. Lace my boots back up. Check over my bow and remaining nine arrows. Test my left ear repeatedly for signs of life by rustling a leaf near it, but without good results. Despite the groosling and the fish, my stomachs growling, and I know Im going to have what we call a hollow day back in District 12. Thats a day where no matter what you put in your belly, its never enough. Having nothing to do but sit in a tree makes it worse, so I decide to give into it. After all, Ive lost a lot of weight in the arena, I need some extra calories. And having the bow and arrows makes me far more confident about my future prospects. I slowly peel and eat a handful of nuts. My last cracker. The groosling neck. Thats good because it takes time to pick clean. Finally, a groosling wing and the bird is history. But its a hollow day, and even with all that I start daydreaming about food.

Particularly the decadent dishes served in the Capitol. The chicken in creamy orange sauce. The cakes and pudding. Bread with butter. Noodles in green sauce. The lamb and dried plum stew. I suck on a few mint leaves and tell myself to get over it. Mint is good because we drink mint tea after supper often, so it tricks my stomach into thinking eating time is over. Sort of. Dangling up in the tree, with the sun warming me, a mouthful of mint, my bow and arrows at hand . . . This is the most relaxed Ive been since Ive entered the arena. If only Rue would show up, and we could clear out. As the shadows grow, so does my restlessness. By late afternoon, Ive resolved to go looking for her. I can at least visit the spot

where she set the third fire and see if there are any clues to her whereabouts. Before I go, I scatter a few mint leaves around our old campfire. Since we gathered these some distance away, Rue will understand Ive been here, while theyll mean nothing to the Careers. In less than an hour, Im at the place where we agreed to have the third fire and I know something has gone amiss. The wood has been neatly arranged, expertly interspersed with tinder, but it has never been lit. Rue set up thefire but never made it back here. Somewhere between the second column of smoke I spied before I blew up the supplies and this point, she ran into trouble. I have to remind myself shes still alive. Or is she? Could the cannon shot announcing her death have come in the wee hours of the morning when even my good ear was too broken to pick it up? Will she appear in the sky tonight? No, I refuse to believe it. There could be a hundred other explanations. She could have lost her way. Run into a pack of predators or another tribute, like Thresh, and had to hide. Whatever happened, Im almost certain shes stuck out there, somewhere between the second fire and the unlit one at my feet. Something is keeping her up a tree. I think Ill go hunt it down. Its a relief to be doing something after sitting around all afternoon. I creep silently through the shadows, letting them conceal me. But nothing seems suspicious. Theres no sign of any kind of struggle, no disruption of the needles on the ground. Ive stopped for just a moment when I hear it. I have to cock my head around to the side to be sure, but there it is again. Rues four-note tune coming out of a mockingjays mouth. The one that means shes all right. I grin and move in the direction of the bird. Another just a short distance ahead, picks up on the handful of notes. Rue has been

singing to them, and recently. Otherwise theyd have taken up some other song. My eyes lift up into the trees, searching for a sign of her. I swallow and sing softly back, hoping shell know its safe to join me. A mockingjay repeats the melody to me. And thats when I hear the scream. Its a childs scream, a young girls scream, theres no one in the arena capable of making that sound except Rue. And now Im running, knowing this may be a trap, knowing the three Careers may be poised to attack me, but I cant help myself. Theres another high-pitched cry, this time my name. Katniss! Katniss! Rue! I shout back, so she knows Im near. So, they know Im near, and hopefully the girl who has attacked them with tracker jackers and gotten an eleven they still cant explain will be enough to pull their attention away from her. Rue! Im coming! When I break into the clearing, shes on the ground, hopelessly entangled in a net. She just has time to reach her hand through the mesh and say my name before the spear enters her body.

18.

The boy from District 1 dies before he can pull out the spear. My arrow drives deeply into the center of his neck. He falls to his knees and

halves the brief remainder of his life by yanking out the arrow and drowning in his own blood. Im reloaded, shifting my aim from side to side, while I shout at Rue, Are there more? Are there more? She has to say no several times before I hear it. Rue has rolled to her side, her body curved in and around the spear. I shove the boy away from her and pull out my knife, freeing her from the net. One look at the wound and I know its far beyond my capacity to heal, beyond anyones probably. The spearhead is buried up to the shaft in her stomach. I crouch before her, staring helplessly at the embedded weapon. Theres no point in comforting words, in telling her shell be all right. Shes no fool. Her hand reaches out and I clutch it like a lifeline. As if its me whos dying instead of Rue. You blew up the food? she whispers. Every last bit, I say. You have to win, she says. Im going to. Going to win for both of us now, I promise. I hear a cannon and look up. It must be for the boy from District 1. Dont go. Rue tightens her grip on my hand. Course not. Staying right here, I say. I move in closer

to her, pulling her head onto my lap. I gently brush the dark, thick hair back behind her ear. Sing, she says, but I barely catch the word. Sing? I think. Sing what? I do know a few songs. Believe it or not, there was once music in my house, too. Music I helped make. My father pulled me in with that remarkable voice but I havent sung much since he died. Except when Prim is very sick. Then I sing her the same songs she liked as a baby. Sing. My throat is tight with tears, hoarse from smoke and fatigue. But if this is Prims, I mean, Rues last request, I have to at least try. The song that comes to me is a simple lullaby, one we sing fretful, hungry babies to sleep with, Its old, very old I think. Made up long ago in our hills. What my music teacher calls a mountain air. But the words are easy and soothing, promising tomorrow will be more hopeful than this awful piece of time we call today. I give a small cough, swallow hard, and begin:

Deep in the meadow, under the willowA bed of grass, a soft green pillowLay down your head, and close your sleepy eyesAnd when again they open, the sun will rise.Here its safe, here its warmHere the daisies guard you from every harmHere your dreams are sweet and tomorrow brings them trueHere is the place where I love you.

Rues eyes have fluttered shut. Her chest moves but only slightly. My throat releases the tears and they slide down my cheeks. But I have to finish the song for her.

Deep in the meadow, hidden far awayA cloak of leaves, a moonbeam rayForget your woes and let your troubles layAnd when again its morning, theyll wash away.

Here its safe, here its warmHere the daisies guard you from every harm

The final lines are barely audible.

Here your dreams are sweet and tomorrow brings them trueHere is the place where I love you.

Everythings still and quiet. Then, almost eerily, the mockingjays take up my song. For a moment, I sit there, watching my tears drip down on her face. Rues cannon fires. I lean forward and press my lips against her temple. Slowly, as if not to wake her, I lay her head back on the ground and release her hand. Theyll want me to clear out now. So they can collect the bodies. And theres nothing to stay for. I roll the boy from District 1 onto his face and take his pack, retrieve the arrow that ended his life. I cut Rues pack from her back as well, knowing shed want me to have it but leave the spear in her stomach. Weapons in bodies will be transported to the hovercraft. Ive no use for a spear, so the sooner its gone from the arena the better. I cant stop looking at Rue, smaller than ever, a baby animal curled up in a nest of netting. I cant bring myself to leave her like this. Past harm, but seeming utterly defenseless. To hate the boy from District 1, who also appears so vulnerable in death, seems inadequate. Its the Capitol I hate, for doing this to all of us. Gales voice is in my head. His ravings against the Capitol no longer pointless, no longer to be ignored. Rues death has forced me to confront my own fury against the cruelty, the injustice they inflict upon us. But here, even more strongly than at home, I feel my impotence.

Theres no way to take revenge on the Capitol. Is there? Then I remember Peetas words on the roof. Only I keep wishing I could think of a way to . . . To show the Capital they dont own me. That Im more than just a piece in their Games. And for the first time, I understand what he means. I want to do something, right here, right now, to shame them, to make them accountable, to show the Capitol that whatever they do or force us to do there is a part of every tribute they cant own. That Rue was more than a piece in their Games. And so am I. A few steps into the woods grows a bank of wildflowers. Perhaps they are really weeds of some sort, but they have blossoms in beautiful shades of violet and yellow and white. I gather up an armful and come back to Rues side. Slowly, one stem at a time, I decorate her body in the flowers. Covering the ugly wound. Wreathing her face. Weaving her hair with bright colors. Theyll have to show it. Or, even if they choose to turn the cameras elsewhere at this moment, theyll have to bring them back when they collect the bodies and everyone will see her then and know I did it. I step back and take a last look at Rue. She could really be asleep in that meadow after all. Bye, Rue, I whisper. I press the three middle fingers of my left hand against my lips and hold them out in her

direction. Then I walk away without looking back. The birds fall silent. Somewhere, a mockingjay gives the warning whistle that precedes the hovercraft. I dont know how it knows. It must hear

things that humans cant. I pause, my eyes focused on whats ahead, not whats happening behind me. It doesnt take long, then the general birdsong begins again and I know shes gone. Another mockingjay, a young one by the look of it, lands on a branch before me and bursts out Rues melody. My song, the hovercraft, were too unfamiliar for this novice to pick up, but it has mastered her handful of notes. The ones that mean shes safe. Good and safe, I say as I pass under its branch. We dont have to worry about her now. Good and safe. Ive no idea where to go. The brief sense of home I had that one night with Rue has vanished. My feet wander this way and that until sunset. Im not afraid, not even watchful. Which makes me an easy target. Except Id kill anyone I met on sight. Without emotion or the slightest tremor in my hands. My hatred of the Capitol has not lessened my hatred of my competitors in the least. Especially the Careers. They, at least, can be made to pay for Rues death. No one materializes though. There arent many of us left and its a big arena. Soon theyll be pulling out some other device to force us together. But theres been enough gore today. Perhaps well even get to sleep. Im about to haul my packs into a tree to make camp when a silver parachute floats down and lands in front of me. A gift from a sponsor. But why now? Ive been in fairly good shape with supplies. Maybe Haymitchs noticed my despondency and is trying to cheer me up a bit. Or could it be something to help my ear? I open the parachute and find a small loaf of bread Its not the fine white Capitol stuff. Its made of dark ration grain and shaped in a crescent. Sprinkled with seeds. I flash back to Peetas lesson on the various district breads in the Training Center. This bread came from District 11. I cautiously lift the still warm loaf. What must it have cost the people of District 11 who cant even feed themselves? How many wouldve had to do without to scrape up a coin to put in the collection for this one loaf? It had been meant for Rue, surely. But instead of pulling the gift when she died, theyd authorized Haymitch to give it to me. As a thank-you? Or because, like me, they dont like to let debts go unpaid? For whatever reason, this is a first. A district gift to a tribute whos not your own. I lift my face and step into the last falling rays of

sunlight. My thanks to the people of District Eleven, I say. I want them to know I know where it came from. That the full value of their gift has been recognized. I climb dangerously high into a tree, not for safety but to get as far away from today as I can. My sleeping bag is rolled neatly in Rues pack. Tomorrow Ill sort through the supplies. Tomorrow Ill make a new plan. But tonight, all I can do is strap myself in and take tiny bites of the bread. Its good. It tastes of home. Soon the seals in the sky, the anthem plays in my right ear. I see the boy from District 1, Rue. Thats all for tonight. Six of us left, I think. Only six. With

the bread still locked in my hands, I fall asleep at once. Sometimes when things are particularly bad, my brain will give me a happy dream. A visit with my father in the woods. An hour of sunlight and cake with Prim. Tonight it sends me Rue, still decked in her flowers, perched in a high sea of trees, trying to teach me to talk to the mockingjays. I see no sign of her wounds, no blood, just a bright, laughing girl. She sings songs Ive never heard in a clear, melodic voice. On and on. Through the night. Theres a drowsy in-between period when I can hear the last few strains of her music although shes lost in the leaves. When I fully awaken, Im momentarily comforted. I try to hold on to the peaceful feeling of the dream, but it quickly slips away, leaving me sadder and lonelier than ever. Heaviness infuses my whole body, as if theres liquid lead in my veins. Ive lost the will to do the simplest tasks, to do anything but lie here, staring unblinkingly through the canopy of leaves. For several hours, I remain motionless. As usual, its the thought of Prims anxious face as she watches me on the screens back home that breaks me from my lethargy. I give myself a series of simple commands to follow, like Now you have to sit up, Katniss. Now you have to drink water, Katniss. I act on the orders with slow, robotic motions. Now you have to sort the packs, Katniss. Rues pack holds my sleeping bag, her nearly empty water skin, a handful of nuts and roots, a bit of rabbit, her extra socks, and her slingshot. The boy from District 1 has several knives, two spare spearheads, a flashlight, a small leather pouch, a first-aid kit, a full bottle of water, and a pack of dried fruit. A pack of dried fruit! Out of all he might have chosen from. To me, this is a sign of extreme arrogance. Why bother to carry food when you have such a bounty back at camp? When you will kill your enemies so quickly youll be home before youre

hungry? I can only hope the other Careers traveled so lightly when it came to food and now find themselves with nothing. Speaking of which, my own supply is running low. I finish off the loaf from District 11 and the last of the rabbit. How quickly the food disappears. All I have left are Rues roots and nuts, the boys dried fruit, and one strip of beef. Now you have to hunt, Katniss, I tell myself. I obediently consolidate the supplies I want into my pack. After I climb down the tree, I conceal the boys knives and spearheads in a pile of rocks so that no one else can use them. Ive lost my bearings what with all the wandering around I did yesterday evening, but I try and head back in the general direction of the stream. I know Im on course when I come across Rues third, unlit fire. Shortly thereafter, I discover a flock of grooslings perched in the trees and take out three before they know what hit them. I return to Rues signal fire and start it up, not caring about the excessive smoke. Where are you, Cato? I think as I roast the birds and Rues roots. Im

waiting right here. Who knows where the Careers are now? Either too far to reach me or too sure this is a trick or ... Is it possible? Too scared of me? They know I have the bow and arrows, of course, Cato saw me take them from Glimmers body, but have they put two and two together yet? Figured out I blew up the supplies and killed their fellow Career? Possibly they think Thresh did this. Wouldnt he be more likely to revenge Rues death than I would? Being from the same district? Not that he ever took any interest in her. And what about Foxface? Did she hang around to watch me blow up the supplies? No. When I caught her laughing in the ashes the next morning, it was as if someone had given her a lovely surprise. I doubt they think Peeta has lit this signal fire. Catos sure hes as good as dead. I find myself wishing I could tell Peeta about the flowers I put on Rue. That I now understand what he was trying to say on the roof. Perhaps if he wins the Games, hell see me on victors night, when they replay the highlights of the Games on a screen over the stage where we did our interviews. The winner sits in a place of honor on the platform, surrounded by their support crew. But I told Rue Id be there. For both of us. And somehow that seems even more important than the vow I gave Prim. I really think I stand a chance of doing it now.


Winning. Its not just having the arrows or outsmarting the Careers a few times, although those things help. Something happened when I was holding Rues hand, watching the life drain out of her. Now I am determined to revenge her, to make her loss unforgettable, and I can only do that by winning and thereby making myself unforgettable. I overcook the birds hoping someone will show up to shoot, but no one does. Maybe the other tributes are out there beating one another senseless. Which would be fine, Ever since the bloodbath, Ive been featured on screens most than I care. Eventually, I wrap up my food and go back to the stream to replenish my water and gather some. But the heaviness from the morning drapes back over me and even though its only early evening, I climb a tree and settle in for the night. My brain begins to replay the events from yesterday. I keep seeing Rue speared, my arrow piercing the boys neck. I dont know why I should even care about the boy. Then I realize . . . He was my first kill. Along with other statistics they report to help people place their bets, every tribute has a list of kills. I guess technically Id get credited for Glimmer and the girl from District 4, too, for dumping that nest on them. But the boy from District 1 was the first person I knew would die because of my actions.Numerous animals have lost their lives at my hands, but only one human. I hear Gale saying, How different can it be, really? Amazingly similar in the execution. A bow pulled, an arrow shot. Entirely different in the aftermath. I killed a boy whose name I dont even know. Somewhere his family is weeping for him. His friends

call for my blood. Maybe he had a girlfriend who really believed he would come back . . . But then I think of Rues still body and Im able to banish the boy from my mind. At least, for now. Its been an uneventful day according to the sky. No deaths. I wonder how long well get until the next catastrophe drives us back together. If its going to be tonight, I want to get some sleep first. I cover my good ear to block out the strains of the anthem, but then I hear the trumpets and sit straight up in anticipation. For the most part, the only communication the tributes get from outside the arena is the nightly death toll. But occasionally, there will be trumpets followed by an announcement. Usually, this will be a call to a feast. When food is scarce, the Gamemakers will invite the players to a banquet, somewhere known to all like the Cornucopia, as an inducement to gather and fight. Sometimes there is a feast

and sometimes theres nothing but a loaf of stale bread for the tributes to compete for. I wouldnt go in for the food, but this could be an ideal time to take out a few competitors. Claudius Templesmiths voice booms down from overhead, congratulating the six of us who remain. But he is not inviting us to a feast. Hes saying something very confusing. Theres been a rule change in the Games. A rule change! That in itself is mind bending since we dont really have any rules to speak of except dont step off your circle for sixty seconds and the unspoken rule about not eating one another. Under the new rule, both tributes from the same district will be declared winners if they are the last two alive. Claudius pauses, as if he knows were not getting it, and repeats the change again. The news sinks in. Two tributes can win this year. If theyre from the same district. Both can live. Both of us can live. Before I can stop myself, I call out Peetas name.

PART III"THE VICTOR"

19.I clap my hands over my mouth, but the sound has already escaped. The sky goes black and I hear a chorus of frogs begin to sing. Stupid! I tell myself. What a stupid thing to do! I wait, frozen, for the woods to come alive with assailants. Then I remember theres almost no one left. Peeta, whos been wounded, is now my ally. Whatever doubts Ive had about him dissipate because if either of us took the others life now wed be pariahs when we returned to District 12. In fact, I know if I was watching Id loathe any tribute who didnt immediately ally with their district partner. Besides, it just makes sense to protect each other. And in my case being one of the star-crossed lovers from District 12 its an absolute requirement if I want any more help from sympathetic sponsors. The star-crossed lovers . . . Peeta must have been playing that angle all along. Why else would the Gamemakers have made this unprecedented change in the rules? For two tributes to have a shot at winning, our romance must be so popular with the audience that condemning it would jeopardize the success of the Games. No

thanks to me. All Ive done is managed not to kill Peeta. But whatever hes done

in the arena, he must have the audience convinced it was to keep me alive. Shaking his head to keep me from running to the Cornucopia. Fighting Cato to let me escape. Even hooking up with the Careers must have been a move to protect me. Peeta, it turns out, has never been a danger to me. The thought makes me smile. I drop my hands and hold my face up to the moonlight so the cameras can be sure to catch it. So, who is there left to be afraid of? Foxface? The boy tribute from her district is dead. Shes operating alone, at night. And her strategy has been to evade, not attack. I dont really think that, even if she heard my voice, shed do anything but hope someone else would kill me. Then theres Thresh. All right, hes a distinct threat. But I havent seen him, not once, since the Games began. I think about how Foxface grew alarmed when she heard a sound at the site of the explosion. But she didnt turn to the Woods, she turned to whatever lies across from it. To that area of the arena that drops off into I dont know what. I feel almost certain that the person she ran from was Thresh and that is his domain. Hed never have heard me from there and, even if he did, Im up too high for someone his size to reach. So that leaves Cato and the girl from District 2, who are now surely celebrating the new rule. Theyre the only

ones left who benefit from it besides Peeta and myself. Do I run from them now, on the chance they heard me call Peetas name? No, I think. Let them come. Let them come with their night-vision glasses and their heavy, branch-breaking bodies. Right into the range of my arrows. But I know they wont. If they didnt come in daylight to my fire, they wont risk what could be another trap at night. When they come, it will be on their own terms, not because Ive let them know my whereabouts. Stay put and get some sleep, Katniss, I instruct myself, although I wish I could start tracking Peeta now. Tomorrow, youll find him. I do sleep, but in the morning Im extra-cautious, thinking that while the Careers might hesitate to attack me in a tree, theyre completely capable of setting an ambush for me. I make sure to fully prepare myself for the day eating a big breakfast, securing my pack, readying my weapons before I descend. But all seems peaceful and undisturbed on the ground. Today Ill have to be scrupulously careful. The Careers will know Im trying to locate Peeta. They may well want to wait until I do before they move in. If hes as badly wounded as Cato thinks, Id be in the position of having to defend us both without any assistance. But if hes that incapacitated, how has he managed to stay alive? And how on earth will I find him? I

try to think of anything Peeta ever said that might give me an indication as to where hes hiding out, but nothing rings a bell. So I go back to the last moment I saw him sparkling in the sunlight, yelling at me to run. Then Cato appeared, his

sword drawn. And after I was gone, he wounded Peeta. But how did Peeta get away? Maybe hed held out better against the tracker jacker poison than Cato. Maybe that was the variable that allowed him to escape. But hed been stung, too. So how far could he have gotten, stabbed and filled with venom? And how has he stayed alive all these days since? If the wound and the stingers havent killed him, surely thirst would have taken him by now. And thats when I get my first clue to his whereabouts. He couldnt have survived without water. I know that from my first few days here. He must be hidden somewhere near a source. Theres the lake, but I find that an unlikely option since its so close to the Careers base camp. A few spring-fed pools. But youd really be a sitting duck at one of those. And the stream. The one that leads from the camp Rue and I made all the way down near the lake and beyond. If he stuck to the stream, he could change his location and always be near water. He could walk in the

current and erase any tracks. He might even be able to get a fish or two. Well, its a place to start, anyway. To confuse my enemies minds, I start a fire with plenty of green wood. Even if they think its a ruse, I hope theyll decide Im hidden somewhere near it. While in reality, Ill be tracking Peeta. The sun burns off the morning haze almost immediately and I can tell the day will be hotter than usual. The waters cool and pleasant on my bare feet as I head downstream. Im tempted to call out Peetas name as I go but decide against it. I will have to find him with my eyes and one good ear or he will have to find me. But hell know Ill be looking, right? He wont have so low of an opinion of me as to think Id ignore the new rule and keep to myself. Would he? Hes very hard to predict, which might be interesting under different circumstances, but at the moment only provides an extra obstacle. It doesnt take long to reach the spot where I peeled off to go the Careers camp. Theres been no sign of Peeta, but this doesnt surprise me. Ive been up and down this stretch three times since the tracker jacker incident. If he were nearby, surely Id have had some suspicion of it. The stream begins to curve to the left into a part of the woods thats new to me. Muddy banks covered in tangled water plants lead to large rocks that increase in size until I

begin to feel somewhat trapped. It would be no small matter to escape the stream now. Fighting off Cato or Thresh as I climbed over this rocky terrain. In fact, Ive just about decided Im on the wrong track entirely, that a wounded boy would be unable to navigate getting to and from this water source, when I see the bloody streak going down the curve of a boulder. Its long dried now, but the smeary lines running side to side suggest someone who perhaps was not fully in control of his mental faculties tried to wipe it away. Hugging the rocks, I move slowly in the direction of the blood, searching for him. I find a few more bloodstains, one

with a few threads of fabric glued to it, but no sign of life. I break down and say his name in a hushed voice. Peeta! Peeta! Then a mockingjay lands on a scruffy tree and begins to mimic my tones so I stop. I give up and climb back down to the stream thinking, He must have moved on. Somewhere farther down. My foot has just broken the surface of the water when I hear a voice. You here to finish me off, sweetheart? I whip around. Its come from the left, so I cant pick it up very well. And the voice was hoarse and weak. Still, it must have been Peeta. Who else in the arena would call me

sweetheart? My eyes peruse the bank, but theres nothing. Just mud, the plants, the base of the rocks. Peeta? I whisper. Where are you? Theres no answer. Could I just have imagined it? No, Im certain it was real and very close at hand, too. Peeta? I creep along the bank. Well, dont step on me. I jump back. His voice was right under my feet. Still theres nothing. Then his eyes open, unmistakably blue in the brown mud and green leaves. I gasp and am rewarded with a hint of white teeth as he laughs. Its the final word in camouflage. Forget chucking weights around. Peeta should have gone into his private session with the Gamemakers and painted himself into a tree. Or a boulder. Or a muddy bank full of weeds. Close your eyes again, I order. He does, and his mouth, too, and completely disappears. Most of what I judge to be his body is actually under a layer of mud and plants. His face and arms are so artfully disguised as to be invisible. I kneel beside him. I guess all those hours decorating cakes paid off. Peeta smiles. Yes, frosting. The final defense of the dying. Youre not going to die, I tell him firmly. Says who? His voice is so ragged. Says me. Were on the same team now, you know, I tell him. His eyes open. So, I heard. Nice of you to find whats left of me. I pull out my water bottle and give him a drink. Did Cato cut you? I ask. Left leg.

Up high, he answers. Lets get you in the stream, wash you off so I can see what kind of wounds youve got, I say. Lean down a minute first, he says. Need to tell you something. I lean over and put my good ear to his lips, which tickle as he whispers. Remember, were madly in love, so its all right to kiss me anytime you feel like it. I jerk my head back but end up laughing. Thanks, Ill keep it in mind. At least, hes still able to joke around. But when I start to help him to the stream, all the levity disappears. Its only two feet away, how hard can it be? Very hard when I realize hes unable to move an inch on his own. Hes so weak that the best he can do is not to resist. I try to drag him, but despite the fact that I know hes doing all he can to keep quiet, sharp cries of pain escape him. The mud and plants seem to have imprisoned him and I finally have to give a gigantic tug to break him from their clutches. Hes still two feet from the water, lying there, teeth gritted, tears cutting trails in the dirt on his face. Look, Peeta, Im

going to roll you into the stream. Its very shallow here, okay? I say. Excellent, he says. I crouch down beside him. No matter what happens, I tell myself, dont stop

until hes in the water. On three, I say. One, two, three! I can only manage one full roll before I have to stop because of the horrible sound hes making. Now hes on the edge of the stream. Maybe this is better anyway. Okay, change of plans. Im not going to put you all the way in, I tell him. Besides, if I get him in, who knows if Id ever be able to get him out? No more rolling? he asks. Thats all done. Lets get you cleaned up. Keep an eye on the woods for me, okay? I say. Its hard to know where to start. He so caked with mud and matted leaves, I cant even see his clothes. If hes wearing clothes. The thought makes me hesitate a moment, but then I plunge in. Naked bodies are no big deal in the arena, right? Ive got two water bottles and Rues water skin. I prop them against rocks in the stream so that two are always filling while I pour the third over Peetas body. It takes a while, but I finally get rid of enough mud to find his clothes. I gently unzip his jacket, unbutton his shirt and ease them off him. His undershirt is so plastered into his wounds I have to cut it away with my knife and drench him again to work it loose. Hes badly bruised with a long burn across his chest and four tracker jacker stings, if you count the one under his ear. But I feel a bit better. This much I can fix. I decide to take care of his upper body first, to alleviate

some pain, before I tackle whatever damage Cato did to his leg. Since treating his wounds seems pointless when hes lying in whats become a mud puddle, I manage to prop him up against a boulder. He sits there, uncomplaining, while I wash away all the traces of dirt from his hair and skin. His flesh is very pale in the sunlight and he no longer looks strong and stocky. I have to dig the stingers out of his tracker jacker lumps, which causes him to wince, but the minute I apply the leaves he sighs in relief. While he dries in the sun, I wash his filthy shirt and jacket and spread them over boulders. Then I apply the burn cream to his chest. This is when I notice how hot his skin is becoming. The layer of mud and the bottles of water have disguised the fact that hes burning with fever. I dig through the first-aid kit I got from the boy from District 1 and find pills that reduce your temperature. My mother actually breaks down and buys these on occasion when her home remedies fail. Swallow these, I tell him, and he obediently takes the medicine. You must be hungry. Not really. Its funny, I havent been hungry for days, says Peeta. In fact, when I offer him groosling, he wrinkles his nose at it and turns away. Thats when I know how sick he is. Peeta, we need to get some food in you, I insist. Itll just come right back up, he says. The best I

can do is to get him to eat a few bits of dried apple. Thanks. Im much better, really. Can I sleep now,

Katniss? he asks. Soon, I promise. I need to look at your leg first. Trying to be as gentle as I can, I remove his boots, his socks, and then very slowly inch his pants off of him. I can see the tear Catos sword made in the fabric over his thigh, but it in no way prepares me for what lies underneath. The deep inflamed gash oozing both blood and pus. The swelling of the leg. And worst of all, the smell of festering flesh. I want to run away. Disappear into the woods like I did that day they brought the burn victim to our house. Go and hunt while my mother and Prim attend to what I have neither the skill nor the courage to face. But theres no one here but me. I try to capture the calm demeanor my mother assumes when handling particularly bad cases. Pretty awful, huh? says Peeta. Hes watching me closely. So-so. I shrug like its no big deal. You should see some of the people they bring my mother from the mines. I refrain from saying how I usually clear out of the house whenever shes treating anything worse than a cold. Come to think of it, I dont even much like to be around coughing.

First thing is to clean it well. Ive left on Peetas undershorts because theyre not in bad shape and I dont want to pull them over the swollen thigh and, all right, maybe the idea of him being naked makes me uncomfortable. Thats another thing about my mother and Prim. Nakedness has no effect on them, gives them no cause for embarrassment. Ironically, at this point in the Games, my little sister would be of far more use to Peeta than I am. I scoot my square of plastic under him so I can wash down the rest of him. With each bottle I pour over him, the worse the wound looks. The rest of his lower body has fared pretty well, just one tracker jacker sting and a few small burns that I treat quickly. But the gash on his leg . . . What on earth can I do for that? Why dont we give it some air and then . . . I trail off. And then youll patch it up? says Peeta. He looks almost sorry for me, as if he knows how lost I am. Thats right, I say. In the meantime, you eat these. I put a few dried pear halves in his hand and go back in the stream to wash the rest of his clothes. When theyre flattened out and drying, I examine the contents of the first-aid kit. Its pretty basic stuff. Bandages, fever pills, medicine to calm stomachs. Nothing of the caliber Ill need to treat Peeta. Were going to have to experiment some, I admit. I know the tracker jacker leaves

draw out infection, so I start with those. Within minutes of pressing the handful of chewed-up green stuff into the wound, pus begins running down the side of his leg. I tell myself this is a good thing and bite the inside of my cheek hard because my breakfast is threatening to make a reappearance. Katniss? Peeta says. I meet his eyes, knowing my face must be some shade of green. He mouths the words. How about that kiss? I burst out laughing because the whole thing is so revolting I cant stand it. Something wrong? he asks a little too

innocently. I . . . Im no good at this. Im not my mother. Ive no idea what Im doing and I hate pus, I say. Euh! I allow myself to let out a groan as I rinse away the first round of leaves and apply the second. Euuuh! How do you hunt? he asks. Trust me. Killing things is much easier than this, I say. Although for all I know, I am killing you. Can you speed it up a little? he asks. No. Shut up and eat your pears, I say. After three applications and what seems like a bucket of pus, the wound does look better. Now that the swelling has gone down, I can see how deep Catos sword cut. Right down to the bone. What next, Dr. Everdeen? he asks. Maybe Ill put some of the burn

ointment on it. I think it helps with infection anyway. And wrap it up? I say. I do and the whole thing seems a lot more manageable, covered in clean white cotton. Although, against the sterile bandage, the hem of his undershorts looks filthy and teeming with contagion. I pull out Rues backpack. Here, cover yourself with this and Ill wash your shorts. Oh, I dont care if you see me, says Peeta. Youre just like the rest of my family, I say. I care, all right? I turn my back and look at the stream until the undershorts splash into the current. He must be feeling a bit better if he can throw. You know, youre kind of squeamish for such a lethal person, says Peeta as I beat the shorts clean between two rocks. I wish Id let you give Haymitch a shower after all. I wrinkle my nose at the memory. Whats he sent you so far? Not a thing, says Peeta. Then theres a pause as it hits him. Why, did you get something? Burn medicine, I say almost sheepishly. Oh, and some bread. I always knew you were his favorite, says Peeta. Please, he cant stand being in the same room with me, I say. Because youre just alike, mutters Peeta. I ignore it though because this really isnt the time for me to be insulting Haymitch, which is my first impulse. I let Peeta doze off while his clothes dry out, but by late afternoon, I dont dare wait any longer. I gently shake his

shoulder. Peeta, weve got to go now. Go? He seems confused. Go where? Away from here. Downstream maybe. Somewhere we can hide you until youre stronger, I say. I help him dress, leaving his feet bare so we can walk in the water, and pull him upright. His face drains of color the moment he puts weight on his leg. Come on. You can do this. But he cant. Not for long anyway. We make it about fifty yards downstream, with him propped up by my shoulder, and I can tell hes going to black out. I sit him on the bank, push his head between his knees, and pat his back awkwardly as I survey the area. Of course, Id love to get him up in a tree, but thats not going to happen. It could be worse though. Some of the rocks form small cavelike structures. I set my sights on one about twenty yards above the stream. When Peetas able to stand, I half-guide, half-carry him up to the cave. Really, Id like to look around for a better place, but this one will have to do because my

ally is shot. Paper white, panting, and, even though its only just cooling off, hes shivering. I cover the floor of the cave with a layer of pine needles, unroll my sleeping bag, and tuck him into it. I get a couple of pills and some water into him

when hes not noticing, but he refuses to eat even the fruit. Then he just lies there, his eyes trained on my face as I build a sort of blind out of vines to conceal the mouth of the cave. The result is unsatisfactory. An animal might not question it, but a human would see hands had manufactured it quickly enough. I tear it down in frustration. Katniss, he says. I go over to him and brush the hair back from his eyes. Thanks for finding me. You would have found me if you could, I say. His foreheads burning up. Like the medicines having no effect at all. Suddenly, out of nowhere, Im scared hes going to die. Yes. Look, if I dont make it back he begins. Dont talk like that. I didnt drain all that pus for nothing, I say. I know. But just in case I dont he tries to continue. No, Peeta, I dont even want to discuss it, I say, placing my fingers on his lips to quiet him. But I he insists. Impulsively, I lean forward and kiss him, stopping his words. This is probably overdue anyway since hes right, we are supposed to be madly in love. Its the first time Ive ever kissed a boy, which should make some sort of impression I guess, but all I can register is how unnaturally hot his lips are from the fever. I break away and pull the edge of the sleeping bag up around him. Youre not going to die. I forbid it. All right? All right, he whispers. I step out in the cool

evening air just as the parachute floats down from the sky. My fingers quickly undo the tie, hoping for some real medicine to treat Peetas leg. Instead I find a pot of hot broth. Haymitch couldnt be sending me a clearer message. One kiss equals one pot of broth. I can almost hear his snarl. Youre supposed to be in love, sweetheart. The boys dying. Give me something I can work with! And hes right. If I want to keep Peeta alive, Ive got to give the audience something more to care about. Star-crossed lovers desperate to get home together. Two hearts beating as one. Romance. Never having been in love, this is going to be a real trick. I think of my parents. The way my father never failed to bring her gifts from the woods. The way my mothers face would light up at the sound of his boots at the door. The way she almost stopped living when he died. Peeta! I say, trying for the special tone that my mother used only with my father. Hes dozed off again, but I kiss him awake, which seems to startle him. Then he smiles as if hed be happy to lie there gazing at me forever. Hes great at this stuff. I hold up the pot. Peeta, look what Haymitch has sent you.

