Cressida and her crew tape Johanna and me on the
firing range. I know Gale and Finnick are being filmed as
well. It's part of a new propos series to show the rebels
preparing for the Capitol invasion. On the whole, things are
going pretty well.
Then Peeta starts showing up for our morning
workouts. The manacles are off, but he's still constantly
accompanied by a pair of guards. After lunch, I see him
across the field, drilling with a group of beginners. I don't
know what they're thinking. If a spat with Delly can reduce
him to arguing with himself, he's got no business learning
how to assemble a gun.
When I confront Plutarch, he assures me that it's all for
the camera. They've got footage of Annie getting married
and Johanna hitting targets, but all of Panem is wondering
about Peeta. They need to see he's fighting for the rebels,
not for Snow. And maybe if they could just get a couple of
shots of the two of us, not kissing necessarily, just looking
happy to be back together--
I walk away from the conversation right then. That is not
going to happen.
In my rare moments of downtime, I anxiously watch the
preparations for the invasions. See equipment and
provisions readied, divisions assembled. You can tell when
someone's received orders because they're given a very
short haircut, the mark of a person going into battle. There
is much talk of the opening offensive, which will be to
secure the train tunnels that feed up into the Capitol.
Just a few days before the first troops are to move out,
York unexpectedly tells Johanna and me she's
recommended us for the exam, and we're to report
immediately. There are four parts: an obstacle course that
assesses your physical condition, a written tactics exam, a
test of weapons proficiency, and a simulated combat
situation in the Block. I don't even have time to get nervous
for the first three and do well, but there's a backlog at the
Block. Some kind of technical bug they're working out. A
group of us exchanges information. This much seems true.
You go through alone. There's no predicting what situation
you'll be thrown into. One boy says, under his breath, that
he's heard it's designed to target each individual's
weaknesses.
My weaknesses? That's a door I don't even want to
open. But I find a quiet spot and try to assess what they
might be. The length of the list depresses me. Lack of
physical brute force. A bare minimum of training. And
somehow my stand-out status as the Mockingjay doesn't
seem to be an advantage in a situation where they're trying
to get us to blend into a pack. They could nail me to the wall
on any number of things.
Johanna's called three ahead of me, and I give her a
nod of encouragement. I wish I had been at the top of the
list because now I'm really overthinking the whole thing. By
the time my name's called, I don't know what my strategy
should be. Fortunately, once I'm in the Block, a certain
amount of training does kick in. It's an ambush situation.
Peacekeepers appear almost instantly and I have to make
my way to a rendezvous point to meet up with my scattered
squad. I slowly navigate the street, taking out
Peacekeepers as I go. Two on the rooftop to my left,
another in the doorway up ahead. It's challenging, but not as
hard as I was expecting. There's a nagging feeling that if it's
too simple, I must be missing the point. I'm within a couple
of buildings from my goal when things begin to heat up. A
half dozen Peacekeepers come charging around the
corner. They will outgun me, but I notice something. A drum
of gasoline lying carelessly in the gutter. This is it. My test.
To perceive that blowing up the drum will be the only way to
achieve my mission. Just as I step out to do it, my squadron
leader, who's been fairly useless up to this point, quietly
orders me to hit the ground. Every instinct I have screams
for me to ignore the voice, to pull the trigger, to blow the
Peacekeepers sky-high. And suddenly, I realize what the
military will think my biggest weakness is. From my first
moment in the Games, when I ran for that orange
backpack, to the firefight in 8, to my impulsive race across
the square in 2. I cannot take orders.
I smack into the ground so hard and fast, I'll be picking
gravel out of my chin for a week. Someone else blows the
gas tank. The Peacekeepers die. I make my rendezvous
point. When I exit the Block on the far side, a soldier
congratulates me, stamps my hand with squad number
451, and tells me to report to Command. Almost giddy with
success, I run through the halls, skidding around corners,
bounding down the steps because the elevator's too slow. I
bang into the room before the oddity of the situation dawns
on me. I shouldn't be in Command; I should be getting my
hair buzzed. The people around the table aren't freshly
minted soldiers but the ones calling the shots.
Boggs smiles and shakes his head when he sees me.
"Let's see it." Unsure now, I hold out my stamped hand.
"You're with me. It's a special unit of sharpshooters. Join
your squad." He nods over at a group lining the wall. Gale.
Finnick. Five others I don't know. My squad. I'm not only in, I
get to work under Boggs. With my friends. I force myself to
take calm, soldierly steps to join them, instead of jumping
up and down.
We must be important, too, because we're in
Command, and it has nothing to do with a certain
Mockingjay. Plutarch stands over a wide, flat panel in the
center of the table. He's explaining something about the
nature of what we will encounter in the Capitol. I'm thinking
this is a terrible presentation--because even on tiptoe I
can't see what's on the panel--until he hits a button. A
holographic image of a block of the Capitol projects into
the air.
"This, for example, is the area surrounding one of the
Peacekeepers' barracks. Not unimportant, but not the most
crucial of targets, and yet look." Plutarch enters some sort
of code on a keyboard, and lights begin to flash. They're in
an assortment of colors and blink at different speeds.
"Each light is called a pod. It represents a different
obstacle, the nature of which could be anything from a
bomb to a band of mutts. Make no mistake, whatever it
contains is designed to either trap or kill you. Some have
been in place since the Dark Days, others developed over
the years. To be honest, I created a fair number myself.
This program, which one of our people absconded with
when we left the Capitol, is our most recent information.
They don't know we have it. But even so, it's likely that new
pods have been activated in the last few months. This is
what you will face."
I'm unaware that my feet are moving to the table until
I'm inches from the holograph. My hand reaches in and
cups a rapidly blinking green light.
Someone joins me, his body tense. Finnick, of course.
Because only a victor would see what I see so immediately.
The arena. Laced with pods controlled by Gamemakers.
Finnick's fingers caress a steady red glow over a doorway.
"Ladies and gentlemen..."
His voice is quiet, but mine rings through the room.
"Let the Seventy-sixth Hunger Games begin!"
I laugh. Quickly. Before anyone has time to register
what lies beneath the words I have just uttered. Before
eyebrows are raised, objections are uttered, two and two
are put together, and the solution is that I should be kept as
far away from the Capitol as possible. Because an angry,
independently thinking victor with a layer of psychological
scar tissue too thick to penetrate is maybe the last person
you want on your squad.
"I don't even know why you bothered to put Finnick and
me through training, Plutarch," I say.
"Yeah, we're already the two best-equipped soldiers
you have," Finnick adds cockily.
"Do not think that fact escapes me," he says with an
impatient wave. "Now back in line, Soldiers Odair and
Everdeen. I have a presentation to finish."
We retreat to our places, ignoring the questioning
looks thrown our way. I adopt an attitude of extreme
concentration as Plutarch continues, nodding my head here
and there, shifting my position to get a better view, all the
while telling myself to hang on until I can get to the woods
and scream. Or curse. Or cry. Or maybe all three at once.
If this was a test, Finnick and I both pass it. When
Plutarch finishes and the meeting's adjourned, I have a bad
moment when I learn there's a special order for me. But it's
merely that I skip the military haircut because they would
like the Mockingjay to look as much like the girl in the arena
as possible at the anticipated surrender. For the cameras,
you know. I shrug to communicate that my hair length's a
matter of complete indifference to me. They dismiss me
without further comment.
Finnick and I gravitate toward each other in the
hallway. "What will I tell Annie?" he says under his breath.
"Nothing," I answer. "That's what my mother and sister
will be hearing from me." Bad enough that we know we're
heading back into a fully equipped arena. No use dropping
it on our loved ones.
"If she sees that holograph--" he begins.
"She won't. It's classified information. It must be," I say.
"Anyway, it's not like an actual Games. Any number of
people will survive. We're just overreacting because--well,
you know why. You still want to go, don't you?"
"Of course. I want to destroy Snow as much as you
do," he says.
"It won't be like the others," I say firmly, trying to
convince myself as well. Then the real beauty of the
situation dawns on me. "This time Snow will be a player,
too."
Before we can continue, Haymitch appears. He wasn't
at the meeting, isn't thinking of arenas but something else.
"Johanna's back in the hospital."
I assumed Johanna was fine, had passed her exam,
but simply wasn't assigned to a sharpshooters' unit. She's
wicked throwing an ax but about average with a gun. "Is she
hurt? What happened?"
"It was while she was on the Block. They try to ferret
out a soldier's potential weaknesses. So they flooded the
street," says Haymitch.
This doesn't help. Johanna can swim. At least, I seem
to remember her swimming around some in the Quarter
Quell. Not like Finnick, of course, but none of us are like
Finnick. "So?"
"That's how they tortured her in the Capitol. Soaked
her and then used electric shocks," says Haymitch. "In the
Block she had some kind of flashback. Panicked, didn't
know where she was. She's back under sedation." Finnick
and I just stand there, as if we've lost the ability to respond. I
think of the way Johanna never showers. How she forced
herself into the rain like it was acid that day. I had attributed
her misery to the morphling withdrawal.
"You two should go see her. You're as close to friends
as she's got," says Haymitch.
That makes the whole thing worse. I don't really know
what's between Johanna and Finnick. But I hardly know her.
No family. No friends. Not so much as a token from 7 to set
beside her regulation clothes in her anonymous drawer.
Nothing.
"I better go tell Plutarch. He won't be happy," Haymitch
continues. "He wants as many victors as possible for the
cameras to follow in the Capitol. Thinks it makes for better
television."
"Are you and Beetee going?" I ask.
"As many young and attractive victors as possible,"
Haymitch corrects himself. "So, no. We'll be here."
Finnick goes directly down to see Johanna, but I linger
outside a few minutes until Boggs comes out. He's my
commander now, so I guess he's the one to ask for any
special favors. When I tell him what I want to do, he writes
me a pass so that I can go to the woods during Reflection,
provided I stay within sight of the guards. I run to my
compartment, thinking to use the parachute, but it's so full of
ugly memories. Instead, I go across the hall and take one of
the white cotton bandages I brought from 12. Square.
Sturdy. Just the thing.
In the woods, I find a pine tree and strip handfuls of
fragrant needles from the boughs. After making a neat pile
in the middle of the bandage, I gather up the sides, give
them a twist, and tie them tightly with a length of vine,
making an apple-sized bundle.
At the hospital room door, I watch Johanna for a
moment, realize that most of her ferocity is in her abrasive
attitude. Stripped of that, as she is now, there's only a slight
young woman, her wide-set eyes fighting to stay awake
against the power of the drugs. Terrified of what sleep will
bring. I cross to her and hold out the bundle.
"What's that?" she says hoarsely. Damp edges of her
hair form little spikes over her forehead.
"I made it for you. Something to put in your drawer." I
place it in her hands. "Smell it."
She lifts the bundle to her nose and takes a tentative
sniff. "Smells like home." Tears flood her eyes.
"That's what I was hoping. You being from Seven and
all," I say. "Remember when we met? You were a tree.
Well, briefly."
Suddenly, she has my wrist in an iron grip. "You have
to kill him, Katniss."
"Don't worry." I resist the temptation to wrench my arm
free.
"Swear it. On something you care about," she hisses.
"I swear it. On my life." But she doesn't let go of my
arm.
"On your family's life," she insists.
"On my family's life," I repeat. I guess my concern for
my own survival isn't compelling enough. She lets go and I
rub my wrist. "Why do you think I'm going, anyway,
brainless?"
That makes her smile a little. "I just needed to hear it."
She presses the bundle of pine needles to her nose and
closes her eyes.
The remaining days go by in a whirl. After a brief
workout each morning, my squad's on the shooting range
full-time in training. I practice mostly with a gun, but they
reserve an hour a day for specialty weapons, which means I
get to use my Mockingjay bow, Gale his heavy militarized
one. The trident Beetee designed for Finnick has a lot of
special features, but the most remarkable is that he can
throw it, press a button on a metal cuff on his wrist, and
return it to his hand without chasing it down.
Sometimes we shoot at Peacekeeper dummies to
become familiar with the weaknesses in their protective
gear. The chinks in the armor, so to speak. If you hit flesh,
you're rewarded with a burst of fake blood. Our dummies
are soaked in red.
It's reassuring to see just how high the overall level of
accuracy is in our group. Along with Finnick and Gale, the
squad includes five soldiers from 13. Jackson, a middleaged
woman who's Boggs's second in command, looks
kind of sluggish but can hit things the rest of us can't even
see without a scope. Farsighted, she says. There's a pair
of sisters in their twenties named Leeg--we call them Leeg
1 and Leeg 2 for clarity--who are so similar in uniform, I
can't tell them apart until I notice Leeg 1 has weird yellow
flecks in her eyes. Two older guys, Mitchell and Homes,
never say much but can shoot the dust off your boots at fifty
yards. I see other squads that are also quite good, but I
don't fully understand our status until the morning Plutarch
joins us.
"Squad Four-Five-One, you have been selected for a
special mission," he begins. I bite the inside of my lip,
hoping against hope that it's to assassinate Snow. "We
have numerous sharpshooters, but rather a dearth of
camera crews. Therefore, we've handpicked the eight of
you to be what we call our 'Star Squad.' You will be the onscreen
faces of the invasion."
Disappointment, shock, then anger run through the
group. "What you're saying is, we won't be in actual
combat," snaps Gale.
"You will be in combat, but perhaps not always on the
front line. If one can even isolate a front line in this type of
war," says Plutarch.
"None of us wants that." Finnick's remark is followed
by a general rumble of assent, but I stay silent. "We're
going to fight."
"You're going to be as useful to the war effort as
possible," Plutarch says. "And it's been decided that you
are of most value on television. Just look at the effect
Katniss had running around in that Mockingjay suit. Turned
the whole rebellion around. Do you notice how she's the
only one not complaining? It's because she understands the
power of that screen."
Actually, Katniss isn't complaining because she has no
intention of staying with the "Star Squad," but she
recognizes the necessity of getting to the Capitol before
carrying out any plan. Still, to be too compliant may arouse
suspicion as well.
"But it's not all pretend, is it?" I ask. "That'd be a waste
of talent."
"Don't worry," Plutarch tells me. "You'll have plenty of
real targets to hit. But don't get blown up. I've got enough on
my plate without having to replace you. Now get to the
Capitol and put on a good show."
The morning we ship out, I say good-bye to my family. I
haven't told them how much the Capitol's defenses mirror
the weapons in the arena, but my going off to war is awful
enough on its own. My mother holds me tightly for a long
time. I feel tears on her cheek, something she suppressed
when I was slated for the Games. "Don't worry. I'll be
perfectly safe. I'm not even a real soldier. Just one of
Plutarch's televised puppets," I reassure her.
Prim walks me as far as the hospital doors. "How do
you feel?"
"Better, knowing you're somewhere Snow can't reach
you," I say.
"Next time we see each other, we'll be free of him,"
says Prim firmly. Then she throws her arms around my
neck. "Be careful."
I consider saying a final good-bye to Peeta, decide it
would only be bad for both of us. But I do slip the pearl into
the pocket of my uniform. A token of the boy with the bread.
A hovercraft takes us to, of all places, 12, where a
makeshift transportation area has been set up outside the
fire zone. No luxury trains this time, but a cargo car packed
to the limit with soldiers in their dark gray uniforms,
sleeping with their heads on their packs. After a couple of
days' travel, we disembark inside one of the mountain
tunnels leading to the Capitol, and make the rest of the sixhour
trek on foot, taking care to step only on a glowing
green paint line that marks safe passage to the air above.
We come out in the rebel encampment, a ten-block
stretch outside the train station where Peeta and I made
our previous arrivals. It's already crawling with soldiers.
Squad 451 is assigned a spot to pitch its tents. This area
has been secured for over a week. Rebels pushed out the
Peacekeepers, losing hundreds of lives in the process. The
Capitol forces fell back and have regrouped farther into the
city. Between us lie the booby-trapped streets, empty and
inviting. Each one will need to be swept of pods before we
can advance.
Mitchell asks about hoverplane bombings--we do feel
very naked pitched out in the open--but Boggs says it's not
an issue. Most of the Capitol's air fleet was destroyed in 2
or during the invasion. If it has any craft left, it's holding on to
them. Probably so Snow and his inner circle can make a
last-minute escape to some presidential bunker
somewhere if needed. Our own hoverplanes were
grounded after the Capitol's antiaircraft missiles decimated
the first few waves. This war will be battled out on the
streets with, hopefully, only superficial damage to the
infrastructure and a minimum of human casualties. The
rebels want the Capitol, just as the Capitol wanted 13.
After three days, much of Squad 451 risks deserting
out of boredom. Cressida and her team take shots of us
firing. They tell us we're part of the disinformation team. If
the rebels only shoot Plutarch's pods, it will take the Capitol
about two minutes to realize we have the holograph. So
there's a lot of time spent shattering things that don't matter,
to throw them off the scent. Mostly we just add to the piles
of rainbow glass that's been blown off the exteriors of the
candy-colored buildings. I suspect they are intercutting this
footage with the destruction of significant Capitol targets.
Once in a while it seems a real sharpshooter's services are
needed. Eight hands go up, but Gale, Finnick, and I are
never chosen.
"It's your own fault for being so camera-ready," I tell
Gale. If looks could kill.
I don't think they quite know what to do with the three of
us, particularly me. I have my Mockingjay outfit with me, but
I've only been taped in my uniform. Sometimes I use a gun,
sometimes they ask me to shoot with my bow and arrows.
It's as if they don't want to entirely lose the Mockingjay, but
they want to downgrade my role to foot soldier. Since I don't
care, it's amusing rather than upsetting to imagine the
arguments going on back in 13.
While I outwardly express discontent about our lack of
any real participation, I'm busy with my own agenda. Each
of us has a paper map of the Capitol. The city forms an
almost perfect square. Lines divide the map into smaller
squares, with letters along the top and numbers down the
side to form a grid. I consume this, noting every intersection
and side street, but it's remedial stuff. The commanders
here are working off Plutarch's holograph. Each has a
handheld contraption called a Holo that produces images
like I saw in Command. They can zoom into any area of the
grid and see what pods await them. The Holo's an
independent unit, a glorified map really, since it can neither
send nor receive signals. But it's far superior to my paper
version.
A Holo is activated by a specific commander's voice
giving his or her name. Once it's working, it responds to the
other voices in the squadron so if, say, Boggs were killed
or severely disabled, someone could take over. If anyone in
the squad repeats "nightlock" three times in a row, the Holo
will explode, blowing everything in a five-yard radius skyhigh.
This is for security reasons in the event of capture. It's
understood that we would all do this without hesitation.
So what I need to do is steal Boggs's activated Holo
and clear out before he notices. I think it would be easier to
steal his teeth.
On the fourth morning, Soldier Leeg 2 hits a
mislabeled pod. It doesn't unleash a swarm of muttation
gnats, which the rebels are prepared for, but shoots out a
sunburst of metal darts. One finds her brain. She's gone
before the medics can reach her. Plutarch promises a
speedy replacement.
The following evening, the newest member of our
squad arrives. With no manacles. No guards. Strolling out
of the train station with his gun swinging from the strap over
his shoulder. There's shock, confusion, resistance, but 451
is stamped on the back of Peeta's hand in fresh ink. Boggs
relieves him of his weapon and goes to make a call.
"It won't matter," Peeta tells the rest of us. "The
president assigned me herself. She decided the propos
needed some heating up."
Maybe they do. But if Coin sent Peeta here, she's
decided something else as well. That I'm of more use to her
dead than alive.
PART III
"THE ASSASSIN"
19
I've never really seen Boggs angry before. Not when
I've disobeyed his orders or puked on him, not even when
Gale broke his nose. But he's angry when he returns from
his phone call with the president. The first thing he does is
instruct Soldier Jackson, his second in command, to set up
a two-person, round-the-clock guard on Peeta. Then he
takes me on a walk, weaving through the sprawling tent
encampment until our squad is far behind us.
"He'll try and kill me anyway," I say. "Especially here.
Where there are so many bad memories to set him off."
"I'll keep him contained, Katniss," says Boggs.
"Why does Coin want me dead now?" I ask.
"She denies she does," he answers.
"But we know it's true," I say. "And you must at least
have a theory."
Boggs gives me a long, hard look before he answers.
"Here's as much as I know. The president doesn't like you.
She never did. It was Peeta she wanted rescued from the
arena, but no one else agreed. It made matters worse when
you forced her to give the other victors immunity. But even
that could be overlooked in view of how well you've
performed."
"Then what is it?" I insist.
"Sometime in the near future, this war will be resolved.
A new leader will be chosen," says Boggs.
I roll my eyes. "Boggs, no one thinks I'm going to be
the leader."
"No. They don't," he agrees. "But you'll throw support to
someone. Would it be President Coin? Or someone else?"
"I don't know. I've never thought about it," I say.
"If your immediate answer isn't Coin, then you're a
threat. You're the face of the rebellion. You may have more
influence than any other single person," says Boggs.
"Outwardly, the most you've ever done is tolerated her."
"So she'll kill me to shut me up." The minute I say the
words, I know they're true.
"She doesn't need you as a rallying point now. As she
said, your primary objective, to unite the districts, has
succeeded," Boggs reminds me. "These current propos
could be done without you. There's only one last thing you
could do to add fire to the rebellion."
"Die," I say quietly.
"Yes. Give us a martyr to fight for," says Boggs. "But
that's not going to happen under my watch, Soldier
Everdeen. I'm planning for you to have a long life."
"Why?" This kind of thinking will only bring him trouble.
"You don't owe me anything."
"Because you've earned it," he says. "Now get back to
your squad."
I know I should feel appreciative of Boggs sticking his
neck out for me, but really I'm just frustrated. I mean, how
can I steal his Holo and desert now? Betraying him was
complicated enough without this whole new layer of debt. I
already owe him for saving my life.
Seeing the cause of my current dilemma calmly
pitching his tent back at our site makes me furious. "What
time is my watch?" I ask Jackson.
She squints at me in doubt, or maybe she's just trying
to get my face in focus. "I didn't put you in the rotation."
"Why not?" I ask.
"I'm not sure you could really shoot Peeta, if it came to
it," she says.
I speak up so the whole squad can hear me clearly. "I
wouldn't be shooting Peeta. He's gone. Johanna's right. It'd
be just like shooting another of the Capitol's mutts." It feels
good to say something horrible about him, out loud, in
public, after all the humiliation I've felt since his return.
"Well, that sort of comment isn't recommending you
either," says Jackson.
"Put her in the rotation," I hear Boggs say behind me.
Jackson shakes her head and makes a note.
"Midnight to four. You're on with me."
The dinner whistle sounds, and Gale and I line up at
the canteen. "Do you want me to kill him?" he asks bluntly.
"That'll get us both sent back for sure," I say. But even
though I'm furious, the brutality of the offer rattles me. "I can
deal with him."
"You mean until you take off? You and your paper map
and possibly a Holo if you can get your hands on it?" So
Gale has not missed my preparations. I hope they haven't
been so obvious to the others. None of them know my mind
like he does, though. "You're not planning on leaving me
behind, are you?" he asks.
Up until this point, I was. But having my hunting partner
to watch my back doesn't sound like a bad idea. "As your
fellow soldier, I have to strongly recommend you stay with
your squad. But I can't stop you from coming, can I?"
He grins. "No. Not unless you want me to alert the rest
of the army."
Squad 451 and the television crew collect dinner from
the canteen and gather in a tense circle to eat. At first I think
that Peeta is the cause of the unease, but by the end of the
meal, I realize more than a few unfriendly looks have been
directed my way. This is a quick turnaround, since I'm pretty
sure when Peeta appeared the whole team was concerned
about how dangerous he might be, especially to me. But it's
not until I get a phone call through to Haymitch that I
understand.
"What are you trying to do? Provoke him into an
attack?" he asks me.
"Of course not. I just want him to leave me alone," I say.
"Well, he can't. Not after what the Capitol put him
through," says Haymitch. "Look, Coin may have sent him
there hoping he'd kill you, but Peeta doesn't know that. He
doesn't understand what's happened to him. So you can't
blame him--"
"I don't!" I say.
"You do! You're punishing him over and over for things
that are out of his control. Now, I'm not saying you shouldn't
have a fully loaded weapon next to you round the clock. But
I think it's time you flipped this little scenario around in your
head. If you'd been taken by the Capitol, and hijacked, and
then tried to kill Peeta, is this the way he would be treating
you?" demands Haymitch.
I fall silent. It isn't. It isn't how he would be treating me at
all. He would be trying to get me back at any cost. Not
shutting me out, abandoning me, greeting me with hostility
at every turn.
"You and me, we made a deal to try and save him.
Remember?" Haymitch says. When I don't respond, he
disconnects after a curt "Try and remember."
The autumn day turns from brisk to cold. Most of the
squad hunker down in their sleeping bags. Some sleep
under the open sky, close to the heater in the center of our
camp, while others retreat to their tents. Leeg 1 has finally
broken down over her sister's death, and her muffled sobs
reach us through the canvas. I huddle in my tent, thinking
over Haymitch's words. Realizing with shame that my
fixation with assassinating Snow has allowed me to ignore
a much more difficult problem. Trying to rescue Peeta from
the shadowy world the hijacking has stranded him in. I don't
know how to find him, let alone lead him out. I can't even
conceive of a plan. It makes the task of crossing a loaded
arena, locating Snow, and putting a bullet through his head
look like child's play.
At midnight, I crawl out of my tent and position myself
on a camp stool near the heater to take my watch with
Jackson. Boggs told Peeta to sleep out in full view where
the rest of us could keep an eye on him. He isn't sleeping,
though. Instead, he sits with his bag pulled up to his chest,
clumsily trying to make knots in a short length of rope. I
know it well. It's the one Finnick lent me that night in the
bunker. Seeing it in his hands, it's like Finnick's echoing
what Haymitch just said, that I've cast off Peeta. Now might
be a good time to begin to remedy that. If I could think of
something to say. But I can't. So I don't. I just let the sounds
of soldiers' breathing fill the night.
After about an hour, Peeta speaks up. "These last
couple of years must have been exhausting for you. Trying
to decide whether to kill me or not. Back and forth. Back
and forth."
That seems grossly unfair, and my first impulse is to
say something cutting. But I revisit my conversation with
Haymitch and try to take the first tentative step in Peeta's
direction. "I never wanted to kill you. Except when I thought
you were helping the Careers kill me. After that, I always
thought of you as...an ally." That's a good safe word. Empty
of any emotional obligation, but nonthreatening.
"Ally." Peeta says the word slowly, tasting it. "Friend.
Lover. Victor. Enemy. Fiancee. Target. Mutt. Neighbor.
Hunter. Tribute. Ally. I'll add it to the list of words I use to try
to figure you out." He weaves the rope in and out of his
fingers. "The problem is, I can't tell what's real anymore,
and what's made up."
The cessation of rhythmic breathing suggests that
either people have woken or have never really been asleep
at all. I suspect the latter.
Finnick's voice rises from a bundle in the shadows.
"Then you should ask, Peeta. That's what Annie does."
"Ask who?" Peeta says. "Who can I trust?"
"Well, us for starters. We're your squad," says
Jackson.
"You're my guards," he points out.
"That, too," she says. "But you saved a lot of lives in
Thirteen. It's not the kind of thing we forget."
In the quiet that follows, I try to imagine not being able
to tell illusion from reality. Not knowing if Prim or my mother
loved me. If Snow was my enemy. If the person across the
heater saved or sacrificed me. With very little effort, my life
rapidly morphs into a nightmare. I suddenly want to tell
Peeta everything about who he is, and who I am, and how
we ended up here. But I don't know how to start. Worthless.
I'm worthless.
At a few minutes before four, Peeta turns to me again.
"Your favorite color...it's green?"
"That's right." Then I think of something to add. "And
yours is orange."
"Orange?" He seems unconvinced.
"Not bright orange. But soft. Like the sunset," I say. "At
least, that's what you told me once."
"Oh." He closes his eyes briefly, maybe trying to
conjure up that sunset, then nods his head. "Thank you."
But more words tumble out. "You're a painter. You're a
baker. You like to sleep with the windows open. You never
take sugar in your tea. And you always double-knot your
shoelaces."
Then I dive into my tent before I do something stupid
like cry.
In the morning, Gale, Finnick, and I go out to shoot
some glass off the buildings for the camera crew. When we
get back to camp, Peeta's sitting in a circle with the
soldiers from 13, who are armed but talking openly with
him. Jackson has devised a game called "Real or Not
Real" to help Peeta. He mentions something he thinks
happened, and they tell him if it's true or imagined, usually
followed by a brief explanation.
"Most of the people from Twelve were killed in the fire."
"Real. Less than nine hundred of you made it to
Thirteen alive."
"The fire was my fault."
"Not real. President Snow destroyed Twelve the way
he did Thirteen, to send a message to the rebels."
This seems like a good idea until I realize that I'll be the
only one who can confirm or deny most of what weighs on
him. Jackson breaks us up into watches. She matches up
Finnick, Gale, and me each with a soldier from 13. This
way Peeta will always have access to someone who knows
him more personally. It's not a steady conversation. Peeta
spends a long time considering even small pieces of
information, like where people bought their soap back
home. Gale fills him in on a lot of stuff about 12; Finnick is
the expert on both of Peeta's Games, as he was a mentor
in the first and a tribute in the second. But since Peeta's
greatest confusion centers around me--and not everything
can be explained simply--our exchanges are painful and
loaded, even though we touch on only the most superficial
of details. The color of my dress in 7. My preference for
cheese buns. The name of our math teacher when we were
little. Reconstructing his memory of me is excruciating.
Perhaps it isn't even possible after what Snow did to him.
But it does feel right to help him try.
The next afternoon, we're notified that the whole squad
is needed to stage a fairly complicated propo. Peeta's
been right about one thing: Coin and Plutarch are unhappy
with the quality of footage they're getting from the Star
Squad. Very dull. Very uninspiring. The obvious response
is that they never let us do anything but playact with our
guns. However, this is not about defending ourselves, it's
about coming up with a usable product. So today, a special
block has been set aside for filming. It even has a couple of
active pods on it. One unleashes a spray of gunfire. The
other nets the invader and traps them for either
interrogation or execution, depending on the captors'
preference. But it's still an unimportant residential block
with nothing of strategic consequence.
The television crew means to provide a sense of
heightened jeopardy by releasing smoke bombs and
adding gunfire sound effects. We suit up in heavy protective
gear, even the crew, as if we're heading into the heart of
battle. Those of us with specialty weapons are allowed to
take them along with our guns. Boggs gives Peeta back his
gun, too, although he makes sure to tell him in a loud voice
that it's only loaded with blanks.
Peeta just shrugs. "I'm not much of a shot anyway." He
seems preoccupied with watching Pollux, to the point
where it's getting a little worrisome, when he finally puzzles
it out and begins to speak with agitation. "You're an Avox,
aren't you? I can tell by the way you swallow. There were
two Avoxes with me in prison. Darius and Lavinia, but the
guards mostly called them the redheads. They'd been our
servants in the Training Center, so they arrested them, too. I
watched them being tortured to death. She was lucky. They
used too much voltage and her heart stopped right off. It
took days to finish him off. Beating, cutting off parts. They
kept asking him questions, but he couldn't speak, he just
made these horrible animal sounds. They didn't want
information, you know? They wanted me to see it."
Peeta looks around at our stunned faces, as if waiting
for a reply. When none is forthcoming, he asks, "Real or not
real?" The lack of response upsets him more. "Real or not
real?!" he demands.
"Real," says Boggs. "At least, to the best of my
knowledge...real."
Peeta sags. "I thought so. There was nothing...shiny
about it." He wanders away from the group, muttering
something about fingers and toes.
I move to Gale, press my forehead into the body armor
where his chest should be, feel his arm tighten around me.
We finally know the name of the girl who we watched the
Capitol abduct from the woods of 12, the fate of the
Peacekeeper friend who tried to keep Gale alive. This is no
time to call up happy moments of remembrance. They lost
their lives because of me. I add them to my personal list of
kills that began in the arena and now includes thousands.
When I look up, I see it has taken Gale differently. His
expression says that there are not enough mountains to
crush, enough cities to destroy. It promises death.
With Peeta's grisly account fresh in our minds, we
crunch through the streets of broken glass until we reach
our target, the block we are to take. It is a real, if small, goal
to accomplish. We gather around Boggs to examine the
Holo projection of the street. The gunfire pod is positioned
about a third of the way down, just above an apartment
awning. We should be able to trigger it with bullets. The net
pod is at the far end, almost the next corner. This will
require someone to set off the body sensor mechanism.
Everyone volunteers except Peeta, who doesn't seem to
know quite what's going on. I don't get picked. I get sent to
Messalla, who dabs some makeup on my face for the
anticipated close-ups.
The squad positions itself under Boggs's direction,
and then we have to wait for Cressida to get the
cameramen in place as well. They're both to our left, with
Castor toward the front and Pollux bringing up the rear so
they'll be sure not to record each other. Messalla sets off a
couple of smoke charges for atmosphere. Since this is
both a mission and a shoot, I'm about to ask who's in
charge, my commander or my director, when Cressida
calls, "Action!"
We slowly proceed down the hazy street, just like one
of our exercises in the Block. Everyone has at least one
section of windows to blow out, but Gale's assigned the
real target. When he hits the pod, we take cover--ducking
into doorways or flattening onto the pretty, light orange and
pink paving stones--as a hail of bullets sweeps back and
forth over our heads. After a while, Boggs orders us
forward.
Cressida stops us before we can rise, since she
needs some close-up shots. We take turns reenacting our
responses. Falling to the ground, grimacing, diving into
alcoves. We know it's supposed to be serious business,
but the whole thing feels a little ridiculous. Especially when
it turns out that I'm not the worst actor in the squad. Not by a
long shot. We're all laughing so hard at Mitchell's attempt to
project his idea of desperation, which involves teeth
grinding and nostrils flaring, that Boggs has to reprimand
us.
"Pull it together, Four-Five-One," he says firmly. But
you can see him suppressing a smile as he's doublechecking
the next pod. Positioning the Holo to find the best
light in the smoky air. Still facing us as his left foot steps
back onto the orange paving stone. Triggering the bomb
that blows off his legs.
20
It's as if in an instant, a painted window shatters,
revealing the ugly world behind it. Laughter changes to
screams, blood stains pastel stones, real smoke darkens
the special effect stuff made for television.
A second explosion seems to split the air and leaves
my ears ringing. But I can't make out where it came from.
I reach Boggs first, try to make sense of the torn flesh,
missing limbs, to find something to stem the red flow from
his body. Homes pushes me aside, wrenching open a firstaid
kit. Boggs clutches my wrist. His face, gray with dying
and ash, seems to be receding. But his next words are an
order. "The Holo."
The Holo. I scramble around, digging through chunks
of tile slick with blood, shuddering when I encounter bits of
warm flesh. Find it rammed into a stairwell with one of
BoggsCatching fire

PART I "THE SPARK"

I clasp the flask between my hands even though the warmth from the tea has long since leached into the frozen air. My muscles are clenched tight against the cold. If a pack of wild dogs were to appear at this moment, the odds of scaling a tree before they attacked are not in my favor. I should get up, move around, and work the stiffness from my limbs. But instead I sit, as motionless as the rock beneath me, while the dawn begins to lighten the woods. I can't fight the sun. I can only watch helplessly as it drags me into a day that I've been dreading for months. By noon they will all be at my new house in the Victor's Village. The reporters, the camera crews, even Effie Trinket, my old escort, will have

made their way to District 12 from the Capitol. I wonder if Effie will still be wearing that silly pink wig, or if she'll be sporting some other unnatural color especially for the Victory Tour. There will be others waiting, too. A staff to cater to my every need on the long train trip. A prep team to beautify me for public appearances. My stylist and friend, Cinna, who designed the gorgeous outfits that first made the audience take notice of me in the Hunger Games. If it were up to me, I would try to forget the Hunger Games entirely. Never speak of them. Pretend they were nothing but a bad dream. But the Victory Tour makes that impossible. Strategically placed almost midway between the annual Games, it is the Capitol's way of keeping the horror fresh and immediate. Not only are we in the districts forced to remember the iron grip of the Capitol's power each year, we are forced to celebrate it. And this year, I am one of the stars
of the show. I will have to travel from district to district, to stand before the cheering crowds who secretly loathe me, to look down into the faces of the families whose children I have killed... The sun persists in rising, so I make myself stand. All my joints complain and my left leg has been asleep for so long that it takes several minutes of pacing to bring the feeling back into it. I've been in the woods three hours, but as I've made no real attempt at hunting, I have nothing to show for it. It doesn't matter for my mother and little sister, Prim, anymore. They can afford to buy butcher meat in town, although none of us likes it any better than fresh game. But my best friend, Gale Hawthorne, and his family will be depending on today's haul and I can't let them down. I start the hour-and-a-half trek it will take to cover our snare line. Back when we were in school, we had time in the afternoons to check the line and hunt and gather and still

get back to trade in town. But now that Gale has gone to work in the coal mines -- and I have nothing to do all day--I've taken over the job. By this time Gale will have clocked in at the

mines, taken the stomach-churning elevator ride into the depths of the earth, and be pounding away at a coal seam. I know what it's like down there. Every year in school, as part of our training, my class had to tour the mines. When I was little, it was just unpleasant. The claustrophobic tunnels, foul air, suffocating darkness on all sides. But after my father and several other miners were killed in an explosion, I could barely force myself onto the elevator. The annual trip became an enormous source of anxiety. Twice I made myself so sick in anticipation of it that my mother kept me home because she thought I had contracted the flu. I
think of Gale, who is only really alive in the woods, with its fresh air and sunlight and clean, flowing water. I don't know how he stands it. Well ... yes, I do. He stands it because it's the way to feed his mother and two younger brothers and sister. And here I am with buckets of money, far more than enough to feed both our families now, and he won't take a single coin. It's even hard for him to let me bring in meat, although he'd surely have kept my mother and Prim supplied if I'd been killed in the Games. I tell him he's doing me a favor, that it drives me nuts to sit around all day. Even so, I never drop off the game while he's at home. Which is easy since he works twelve hours a day. The only time I really get to see Gale now is on Sundays, when we meet up in the woods to hunt together. It's still the best day of the week, but it's not like it used to be before, when we could tell each other anything. The Games have spoiled even that. I keep

hoping that as time passes we'll regain the ease between us, but part of me knows it's futile. There's no going back. I get a good haul from the traps -- eight rabbits, two squirrels, and a beaver that swam into a wire contraption Gale designed himself. He's something of a whiz with snares, rigging them to bent saplings so they pull the kill out of the reach of predators, balancing logs on delicate stick triggers, weaving inescapable baskets to capture fish. As I go along, carefully resetting each snare, I know I can never quite replicate his eye for balance, his instinct for where the prey will cross the path. It's more than experience. It's a natural gift. Like the way I can shoot at an animal in almost complete darkness and still take it down with one arrow. By the time I make it back to the fence that surrounds District 12, the sun is well up. As always, I listen a moment, but there's no telltale hum of electrical current running through the chain
link. There hardly ever is, even though the thing is supposed to be charged full-time. I wriggle through the opening at the bottom of the fence and come up in the Meadow, just a stone's throw from my home. My old home. We still get to keep it since officially it's the designated dwelling of my mother and sister. If I should drop dead right now, they would have to return to it. But at present, they're both

happily installed in the new house in the Victor's Village, and I'm the only one who uses the squat little place where I was raised. To me, it's my real home. I go there now to switch my clothes. Exchange my father's old leather jacket for a fine wool coat that always seems too tight in the shoulders. Leave my soft, worn hunting boots for a pair of expensive machine-made shoes that my mother thinks are more appropriate for someone of my status. I've already

stowed my bow and arrows in a hollow log in the woods. Although time is ticking away, I allow myself a few minutes to sit in the kitchen. It has an abandoned quality with no fire on the hearth, no cloth on the table. I mourn my old life here. We barely scraped by, but I knew where I fit in, I knew what my place was in the tightly interwoven fabric that was our life. I wish I could go back to it because, in retrospect, it seems so secure compared with now, when I am so rich and so famous and so hated by the authorities in the Capitol. A wailing at the back door demands my attention. I open it to find Buttercup, Prim's scruffy old tomcat. He dislikes the new house almost as much as I do and always leaves it when my sister's at school. We've never been particularly fond of each other, but now we have this new bond. I let him in, feed him a chunk of beaver fat, and even rub him between the ears for a bit. "You're hideous, you
know that, right?" I ask him. Buttercup nudges my hand for more petting, but we have to go. "Come on, you." I scoop him up with one hand, grab my game bag with the other, and haul them both out onto the street. The cat springs free and disappears under a bush. The shoes pinch my toes as I crunch along the cinder street. Cutting down alleys and through backyards gets me to Gale's house in minutes. His mother, Hazelle, sees me through the window, where she's bent over the kitchen sink. She dries her hands on her apron and disappears to meet me at the door. I like Hazelle. Respect her. The explosion that killed my father took out her husband as well, leaving her with three boys and a baby due any day. Less than a week after she gave birth, she was out hunting the streets for work. The mines weren't an option, what with a baby to look after, but she managed to get laundry from some of the merchants in town.

At fourteen, Gale, the eldest of the kids, became the main supporter of the family. He was already signed up for tesserae, which entitled them to a meager supply of grain and oil in exchange for his entering his name extra times in the drawing to become a tribute. On top of that, even back then, he was a skilled trapper. But it wasn't enough to keep a family of five without Hazelle working her fingers to the bone on that washboard. In winter her hands got so red and cracked, they bled at the slightest provocation. Still would if it wasn't for a salve my mother concocted. But they are determined, Hazelle and Gale, that the other boys, twelve- year-old Rory and

ten-year-old Vick, and the baby, four-year-old Posy, will never have to sign up for tesserae. Hazelle smiles when she sees the game. She takes the beaver by the tail, feeling its
weight. "He's going to make a nice stew." Unlike Gale, she has no problem with our hunting arrangement. "Good pelt, too," I answer. It's comforting here with Hazelle. Weighing the merits of the game, just as we always have. She pours me a mug of herb tea, which I wrap my chilled fingers around gratefully. "You know, when I get back from the tour, I was thinking I might take Rory out with me sometimes. After school. Teach him to shoot." Hazelle nods. "That'd be good. Gale means to, but he's only got his Sundays, and I think he likes saving those for you." I can't stop the redness that floods my cheeks. It's stupid, of course. Hardly anybody knows me better than Hazelle. Knows the bond I share with Gale. I'm sure plenty of people assumed that we'd eventually get married even if I never gave it any thought. But that was before the Games. Before my fellow tribute, Peeta Mellark, announced he was madly in love with me. Our romance

became a key strategy for our survival in the arena. Only it wasn't just a strategy for Peeta. I'm not sure what it was for me. But I know now it was nothing but painful for Gale. My chest tightens as I think about how, on the Victory Tour, Peeta and I will have to present ourselves as lovers again. I gulp my tea even though it's too hot and push back from the table. "I better get going. Make myself presentable for the cameras." Hazelle hugs me. "Enjoy the food." "Absolutely," I say. My next stop is the Hob, where I've traditionally done the bulk of my trading. Years ago it was a warehouse to store coal, but when it fell into disuse, it became a meeting place for illegal trades and then blossomed into a full-time black market. If it attracts a somewhat criminal element, then I belong here, I guess. Hunting in the woods surrounding District 12 violates at least a dozen laws and is punishable by death. Although they
never mention it, I owe the people who frequent the Hob. Gale told me that Greasy Sae, the old woman who serves up soup, started a collection to sponsor Peeta and me during the Games. It was supposed to be just a Hob thing, but a lot of other people heard about it and chipped in. I don't know exactly how much it was, and the price of any gift in the arena was exorbitant. But for all I know, it made the difference between my life and death. It's still odd to drag open the front door with an empty game bag, with nothing to trade, and instead feel the heavy pocket of coins against my hip. I try to hit as many stalls as possible, spreading out my purchases of coffee, buns, eggs, yarn, and oil. As an afterthought, I buy three bottles of white liquor from a one-armed woman named Ripper, a victim of a mine accident who was smart enough to find a way to stay alive. The liquor isn't for my family. It's for Haymitch,

who acted as mentor for Peeta and me in the Games. He's surly, violent, and drunk most of the time. But he did his job -- more than his job--because for the first time in history, two tributes were allowed to win. So no matter who Haymitch is, I owe him, too. And that's for always. I'm getting the white liquor because a few weeks ago he ran out and there was none for sale and he had a withdrawal, shaking and screaming at terrifying things only he could see. He scared Prim to death and, frankly, it wasn't much fun for me to see him like that, either. Ever since then I've been sort of stockpiling the stuff just in case there's a shortage again. Cray, our Head Peacekeeper, frowns when he sees me with the bottles. He's an older man with a few strands of silver hair combed sideways above his bright red face. "That stuff's too strong for you, girl." He should know. Next to Haymitch, Cray drinks more than anyone I've ever met. "Aw, my
mother uses it in medicines," I say indifferently. "Well, it'd kill just about anything," he says, and slaps down a coin for a bottle. When I reach Greasy Sae's stall, I boost myself up to sit on the counter and order some soup, which looks to be some kind of gourd and bean mixture. A Peacekeeper named Darius comes up and buys a bowl while I'm eating. As law enforcers go, he's one of my favorites. Never really throwing his weight around, usually good for a joke. He's probably in his twenties, but he doesn't seem much older than I do. Something about his smile, his red hair that sticks out every which way, gives him a boyish quality. "Aren't you supposed to be on a train?" he asks me. "They're collecting me at noon," I answer.

"Shouldn't you look better?" he asks in a loud whisper. I can't help smiling at his teasing, in spite of my mood. "Maybe

a ribbon in your hair or something?" He flicks my braid with his hand and I brush him away. "Don't worry. By the time they get through with me I'll be unrecognizable," I say. "Good," he says. "Let's show a little district pride for a change, Miss Everdeen. Hm?" He shakes his head at Greasy Sae in mock disapproval and walks off to join his friends. "I'll want that bowl back," Greasy Sae calls after him, but since she's laughing, she doesn't sound particularly stern. "Gale going to see you off?" she asks me. "No, he wasn't on the list," I say. "I saw him Sunday, though." "Think he'd have made the list. Him being your cousin and all," she says wryly. It's just one more part of the lie the Capitol has concocted. When Peeta and I made it into the final eight in the Hunger Games, they sent reporters to do personal stories about us. When they asked about my friends, everyone directed them to Gale. But it wouldn't do, what with the romance I was playing out in
the arena, to have my best friend be Gale. He was too handsome, too male, and not the least bit willing to smile and play nice for the cameras. We do resemble each other, though, quite a bit. We have that Seam look. Dark straight hair, olive skin, gray eyes. So some genius made him my cousin. I didn't know about it until we were already home, on the platform at the train station, and my mother said, "Your cousins can hardly wait to see you!" Then I turned and saw Gale and Hazelle and all the kids waiting for me, so what could I do but go along? Greasy Sae knows we're not related, but even some of the people who have known us for years seem to have forgotten. "I just can't wait for the whole thing to be over," I whisper. "I know," says Greasy Sae. "But you've got to go through it to get to the end of it. Better not be late." A light snow starts to fall as I make my way to the Victor's Village. It's about a half-mile walk from the square in the

center of town, but it seems like another world entirely. It's a separate community built around a beautiful green, dotted with flowering bushes. There are twelve houses, each large enough to hold ten of the one I was raised in. Nine stand empty, as they always have. The three in use belong to Haymitch, Peeta, and me. The houses inhabited by my family and Peeta give off a warm glow of life. Lit windows, smoke from the chimneys, bunches of brightly colored corn affixed to the front doors as decoration for the upcoming Harvest Festival. However, Haymitch's house, despite the care taken by the grounds-keeper, exudes an air of abandonment and neglect. I brace myself at his front door, knowing it will be foul, then push inside. My nose immediately wrinkles in disgust. Haymitch refuses to let anyone in to clean and does a poor jobekeepers line the
roof across from our former hideout. Shells are launched
into the row of apartments, setting off the chain of
explosions we heard, and the building collapses into rubble
and dust.
Now we cut to a live feed. A reporter stands on the roof
with the Peacekeepers. Behind her, the apartment block
burns. Firefighters try to control the blaze with water hoses.
We are pronounced dead.
"Finally, a bit of luck," says Homes.
I guess he's right. Certainly it's better than having the
Capitol in pursuit of us. But I just keep imagining how this
will be playing back in 13. Where my mother and Prim,
Hazelle and the kids, Annie, Haymitch, and a whole lot of
people from 13 think that they have just seen us die.
"My father. He just lost my sister and now..." says Leeg
1.
We watch as they play the footage over and over.
Revel in their victory, especially over me. Break away to do
a montage of the Mockingjay's rise to rebel power--I think
they've had this part prepared for a while, because it
seems pretty polished--and then go live so a couple of
reporters can discuss my well-deserved violent end. Later,
they promise, Snow will make an official statement. The
screen fades back to a glow.
The rebels made no attempt to break in during the
broadcast, which leads me to believe they think it's true. If
that's so, we really are on our own.
"So, now that we're dead, what's our next move?" asks
Gale."
Isn't it obvious?" No one even knew Peeta had
regained consciousness. I don't know how long he's been
watching, but by the look of misery on his face, long enough
to see what happened on the street. How he went mad,
tried to bash my head in, and hurled Mitchell into the pod.
He painfully pushes himself up to a sitting position and
directs his words to Gale.
"Our next move...is to kill me."
21
That makes two requests for Peeta's death in less than
an hour.
"Don't be ridiculous," says Jackson.
"I just murdered a member of our squad!" shouts
Peeta.
"You pushed him off you. You couldn't have known he
would trigger the net at that exact spot," says Finnick, trying
to calm him.
"Who cares? He's dead, isn't he?" Tears begin to run
down Peeta's face. "I didn't know. I've never seen myself
like that before. Katniss is right. I'm the monster. I'm the
mutt. I'm the one Snow has turned into a weapon!"
"It's not your fault, Peeta," says Finnick.
"You can't take me with you. It's only a matter of time
before I kill someone else." Peeta looks around at our
conflicted faces. "Maybe you think it's kinder to just dump
me somewhere. Let me take my chances. But that's the
same thing as handing me over to the Capitol. Do you think
you'd be doing me a favor by sending me back to Snow?"
Peeta. Back in Snow's hands. Tortured and tormented
until no bits of his former self will ever emerge again.
For some reason, the last stanza to "The Hanging
Tree" starts running through my head. The one where the
man wants his lover dead rather than have her face the evil
that awaits her in the world.
Are you, are you
Coming to the tree
Wear a necklace of rope, side by side with
me.
Strange things did happen here
No stranger would it be
If we met up at midnight in the hanging tree.
"I'll kill you before that happens," says Gale. "I
promise."
Peeta hesitates, as if considering the reliability of this
offer, and then shakes his head. "It's no good. What if
you're not there to do it? I want one of those poison pills like
the rest of you have."
Nightlock. There's one pill back at camp, in its special
slot on the sleeve of my Mockingjay suit. But there's another
in the breast pocket of my uniform. Interesting that they
didn't issue one to Peeta. Perhaps Coin thought he might
take it before he had the opportunity to kill me. It's unclear if
Peeta means he'd finish himself off now, to spare us having
to murder him, or only if the Capitol took him prisoner
again. In the state he's in, I expect it would be sooner rather
than later. It would certainly make things easier on the rest
of us. Not to have to shoot him. It would certainly simplify the
problem of dealing with his homicidal episodes.
I don't know if it's the pods, or the fear, or watching
Boggs die, but I feel the arena all around me. It's as if I've
never left, really. Once again I'm battling not only for my own
survival but for Peeta's as well. How satisfying, how
entertaining it would be for Snow to have me kill him. To
have Peeta's death on my conscience for whatever is left of
my life.
"It's not about you," I say. "We're on a mission. And
you're necessary to it." I look to the rest of the group. "Think
we might find some food here?"
Besides the medical kit and cameras, we have nothing
but our uniforms and our weapons.
Half of us stay to guard Peeta or keep an eye out for
Snow's broadcast, while the others hunt for something to
eat. Messalla proves most valuable because he lived in a
near replica of this apartment and knows where people
would be most likely to stash food. Like how there's a
storage space concealed by a mirrored panel in the
bedroom, or how easy it is to pop out the ventilation screen
in the hallway. So even though the kitchen cupboards are
bare, we find over thirty canned goods and several boxes
of cookies.
The hoarding disgusts the soldiers raised in 13. "Isn't
this illegal?" says Leeg 1.
"On the contrary, in the Capitol you'd be considered
stupid not to do it," says Messalla. "Even before the
Quarter Quell, people were starting to stock up on scarce
supplies."
"While others went without," says Leeg 1.
"Right," says Messalla. "That's how it works here."
"Fortunately, or we wouldn't have dinner," says Gale.
"Everybody grab a can."
Some of our company seem reluctant to do this, but it's
as good a method as any. I'm really not in the mood to divvy
up everything into eleven equal parts, factoring in age, body
weight, and physical output. I poke around in the pile, about
to settle on some cod chowder, when Peeta holds out a
can to me. "Here."
I take it, not knowing what to expect. The label reads
Lamb Stew.
I press my lips together at the memories of rain
dripping through stones, my inept attempts at flirting, and
the aroma of my favorite Capitol dish in the chilly air. So
some part of it must still be in his head, too. How happy,
how hungry, how close we were when that picnic basket
arrived outside our cave. "Thanks." I pop open the top. "It
even has dried plums." I bend the lid and use it as a
makeshift spoon, scooping a bit into my mouth. Now this
place tastes like the arena, too.
We're passing around a box of fancy cream-filled
cookies when the beeping starts again. The seal of Panem
lights up on the screen and remains there while the anthem
plays. And then they begin to show images of the dead, just
as they did with the tributes in the arena. They start with the
four faces of our TV crew, followed by Boggs, Gale,
Finnick, Peeta, and me. Except for Boggs, they don't
bother with the soldiers from 13, either because they have
no idea who they are or because they know they won't
mean anything to the audience. Then the man himself
appears, seated at his desk, a flag draped behind him, the
fresh white rose gleaming in his lapel. I think he might have
recently had more work done, because his lips are puffier
than usual. And his prep team really needs to use a lighter
hand with his blush.
Snow congratulates the Peacekeepers on a masterful
job, honors them for ridding the country of the menace
called the Mockingjay. With my death, he predicts a turning
of the tide in the war, since the demoralized rebels have no
one left to follow. And what was I, really? A poor, unstable
girl with a small talent with a bow and arrow. Not a great
thinker, not the mastermind of the rebellion, merely a face
plucked from the rabble because I had caught the nation's
attention with my antics in the Games. But necessary, so
very necessary, because the rebels have no real leader
among them.
Somewhere in District 13, Beetee hits a switch,
because now it's not President Snow but President Coin
who's looking at us. She introduces herself to Panem,
identifies herself as the head of the rebellion, and then
gives my eulogy. Praise for the girl who survived the Seam
and the Hunger Games, then turned a country of slaves into
an army of freedom fighters. "Dead or alive, Katniss
Everdeen will remain the face of this rebellion. If ever you
waver in your resolve, think of the Mockingjay, and in her
you will find the strength you need to rid Panem of its
oppressors."
"I had no idea how much I meant to her," I say, which
brings a laugh from Gale and questioning looks from the
others.
Up comes a heavily doctored photo of me looking
beautiful and fierce with a bunch of flames flickering behind
me. No words. No slogan. My face is all they need now.
Beetee gives the reins back to a very controlled Snow.
I have the feeling the president thought the emergency
channel was impenetrable, and someone will end up dead
tonight because it was breached. "Tomorrow morning,
when we pull Katniss Everdeen's body from the ashes, we
will see exactly who the Mockingjay is. A dead girl who
could save no one, not even herself." Seal, anthem, and
out.
"Except that you won't find her," says Finnick to the
empty screen, voicing what we're all probably thinking. The
grace period will be brief. Once they dig through those
ashes and come up missing eleven bodies, they'll know we
escaped.
"We can get a head start on them at least," I say.
Suddenly, I'm so tired. All I want is to lie down on a nearby
green plush sofa and go to sleep. To cocoon myself in a
comforter made of rabbit fur and goose down. Instead, I pull
out the Holo and insist that Jackson talk me through the
most basic commands--which are really about entering the
coordinates of the nearest map grid intersection--so that I
can at least begin to operate the thing myself. As the Holo
projects our surroundings, I feel my heart sink even further.
We must be moving closer to crucial targets, because the
number of pods has noticeably increased. How can we
possibly move forward into this bouquet of blinking lights
without detection? We can't. And if we can't, we are
trapped like birds in a net. I decide it's best not to adopt
some sort of superior attitude when I'm with these people.
Especially when my eyes keep drifting to that green sofa.
So I say, "Any ideas?"
"Why don't we start by ruling out possibilities," says
Finnick. "The street is not a possibility."
"The rooftops are just as bad as the street," says Leeg
1.
"We still might have a chance to withdraw, go back the
way we came," says Homes. "But that would mean a failed
mission."
A pang of guilt hits me since I've fabricated said
mission. "It was never intended for all of us to go forward.
You just had the misfortune to be with me."
"Well, that's a moot point. We're with you now," says
Jackson. "So, we can't stay put. We can't move up. We
can't move laterally. I think that just leaves one option."
"Underground," says Gale.
Underground. Which I hate. Like mines and tunnels
and 13. Underground, where I dread dying, which is stupid
because even if I die aboveground, the next thing they'll do
is bury me underground anyway.
The Holo can show subterranean as well as streetlevel
pods. I see that when we go underground the clean,
dependable lines of the street plan are interlaced with a
twisting, turning mess of tunnels. The pods look less
numerous, though.
Two doors down, a vertical tube connects our row of
apartments to the tunnels. To reach the tube apartment, we
will need to squeeze through a maintenance shaft that runs
the length of the building. We can enter the shaft through the
back of a closet space on the upper floor.
"Okay, then. Let's make it look like we've never been
here," I say. We erase all signs of our stay. Send the empty
cans down a trash chute, pocket the full ones for later, flip
sofa cushions smeared with blood, wipe traces of gel from
the tiles. There's no fixing the latch on the front door, but we
lock a second bolt, which will at least keep the door from
swinging open on contact.
Finally, there's only Peeta to contend with. He plants
himself on the blue sofa, refusing to budge. "I'm not going.
I'll either disclose your position or hurt someone else."
"Snow's people will find you," says Finnick.
"Then leave me a pill. I'll only take it if I have to," says
Peeta.
"That's not an option. Come along," says Jackson.
"Or you'll what? Shoot me?" asks Peeta.
"We'll knock you out and drag you with us," says
Homes. "Which will both slow us down and endanger us."
"Stop being noble! I don't care if I die!" He turns to me,
pleading now. "Katniss, please. Don't you see, I want to be
out of this?"
The trouble is, I do see. Why can't I just let him go? Slip
him a pill, pull the trigger? Is it because I care too much
about Peeta or too much about letting Snow win? Have I
turned him into a piece in my private Games? That's
despicable, but I'm not sure it's beneath me. If it's true, it
would be kindest to kill Peeta here and now. But for better
or worse, I am not motivated by kindness. "We're wasting
time. Are you coming voluntarily or do we knock you out?"
Peeta buries his face in his hands for a few moments,
then rises to join us.
"Should we free his hands?" asks Leeg 1.
"No!" Peeta growls at her, drawing his cuffs in close to
his body.
"No," I echo. "But I want the key." Jackson passes it
over without a word. I slip it into my pants pocket, where it
clicks against the pearl.
When Homes pries open the small metal door to the
maintenance shaft, we encounter another problem. There's
no way the insect shells will be able to fit through the narrow
passage. Castor and Pollux remove them and detach
emergency backup cameras. Each is the size of a shoe
box and probably works about as well. Messalla can't think
of anywhere better to hide the bulky shells, so we end up
dumping them in the closet. Leaving such an easy trail to
follow frustrates me, but what else can we do?
Even going single file, holding our packs and gear out
to the side, it's a tight fit. We sidestep our way past the first
apartment, and break into the second. In this apartment,
one of the bedrooms has a door marked utility instead of a
bathroom. Behind the door is the room with the entrance to
the tube.
Messalla frowns at the wide circular cover, for a
moment returning to his own fussy world. "It's why no one
ever wants the center unit. Workmen coming and going
whenever and no second bath. But the rent's considerably
cheaper." Then he notices Finnick's amused expression
and adds, "Never mind."
The tube cover's simple to unlatch. A wide ladder with
rubber treads on the steps allows for a swift, easy descent
into the bowels of the city. We gather at the foot of the
ladder, waiting for our eyes to adjust to the dim strips of
lights, breathing in the mixture of chemicals, mildew, and
sewage.
Pollux, pale and sweaty, reaches out and latches on to
Castor's wrist. Like he might fall over if there isn't someone
to steady him.
"My brother worked down here after he became an
Avox," says Castor. Of course. Who else would they get to
maintain these dank, evil-smelling passages mined with
pods? "Took five years before we were able to buy his way
up to ground level. Didn't see the sun once."
Under better conditions, on a day with fewer horrors
and more rest, someone would surely know what to say.
Instead we all stand there for a long time trying to formulate
a response.
Finally, Peeta turns to Pollux. "Well, then you just
became our most valuable asset." Castor laughs and
Pollux manages a smile.
We're halfway down the first tunnel when I realize what
was so remarkable about the exchange. Peeta sounded
like his old self, the one who could always think of the right
thing to say when nobody else could. Ironic, encouraging, a
little funny, but not at anyone's expense. I glance back at
him as he trudges along under his guards, Gale and
Jackson, his eyes fixed on the ground, his shoulders
hunched forward. So dispirited. But for a moment, he was
really here.
Peeta called it right. Pollux turns out to be worth ten
Holos. There is a simple network of wide tunnels that
directly corresponds to the main street plan above,
underlying the major avenues and cross streets. It's called
the Transfer, since small trucks use it to deliver goods
around the city. During the day, its many pods are
deactivated, but at night it's a minefield. However, hundreds
of additional passages, utility shafts, train tracks, and
drainage tubes form a multilevel maze. Pollux knows details
that would lead to disaster for a newcomer, like which
offshoots might require gas masks or have live wires or
rats the size of beavers. He alerts us to the gush of water
that sweeps through the sewers periodically, anticipates
the time the Avoxes will be changing shifts, leads us into
damp, obscure pipes to dodge the nearly silent passage of
cargo trains. Most important, he has knowledge of the
cameras. There aren't many down in this gloomy, misty
place, except in the Transfer. But we keep well out of their
way.
Under Pollux's guidance we make good time--
remarkable time, if you compare it to our aboveground
travel. After about six hours, fatigue takes over. It's three in
the morning, so I figure we still have a few hours before our
bodies are discovered missing, they search through the
rubble of the whole block of apartments in case we tried to
escape through the shafts, and the hunt begins.
When I suggest we rest, no one objects. Pollux finds a
small, warm room humming with machines loaded with
levers and dials. He holds up his fingers to indicate we
must be gone in four hours. Jackson works out a guard
schedule, and, since I'm not on the first shift, I wedge myself
in the tight space between Gale and Leeg 1 and go right to
sleep.
It seems like only minutes later when Jackson shakes
me awake, tells me I'm on watch. It's six o'clock, and in one
hour we must be on our way. Jackson tells me to eat a can
of food and keep an eye on Pollux, who's insisted on being
on guard the entire night. "He can't sleep down here." I drag
myself into a state of relative alertness, eat a can of potato
and bean stew, and sit against the wall facing the door.
Pollux seems wide awake. He's probably been reliving
those five years of imprisonment all night. I get out the Holo
and manage to input our grid coordinates and scan the
tunnels. As expected, more pods are registering the closer
we move toward the center of the Capitol. For a while,
Pollux and I click around on the Holo, seeing what traps lie
where. When my head begins to spin, I hand it over to him
and lean back against the wall. I look down at the sleeping
soldiers, crew, and friends, and I wonder how many of us
will ever see the sun again.
When my eyes fall on Peeta, whose head rests right by
my feet, I see he's awake. I wish I could read what's going
on in his mind, that I could go in and untangle the mess of
lies. Then I settle for something I can accomplish.
"Have you eaten?" I ask. A slight shake of his head
indicates he hasn't. I open a can of chicken and rice soup
and hand it to him, keeping the lid in case he tries to slit his
wrists with it or something. He sits up and tilts the can,
chugging back the soup without really bothering to chew it.
The bottom of the can reflects the lights from the machines,
and I remember something that's been itching at the back
of my mind since yesterday. "Peeta, when you asked about
what happened to Darius and Lavinia, and Boggs told you
it was real, you said you thought so. Because there was
nothing shiny about it. What did you mean?"
"Oh. I don't know exactly how to explain it," he tells me.
"In the beginning, everything was just complete confusion.
Now I can sort certain things out. I think there's a pattern
emerging. The memories they altered with the tracker
jacker venom have this strange quality about them. Like
they're too intense or the images aren't stable. You
remember what it was like when we were stung?"
"Trees shattered. There were giant colored butterflies.
I fell in a pit of orange bubbles." I think about it. "Shiny
orange bubbles."
"Right. But nothing about Darius or Lavinia was like
that. I don't think they'd given me any venom yet," he says.
"Well, that's good, isn't it?" I ask. "If you can separate
the two, then you can figure out what's true."
"Yes. And if I could grow wings, I could fly. Only people
can't grow wings," he says. "Real or not real?"
"Real," I say. "But people don't need wings to survive."
"Mockingjays do." He finishes the soup and returns the
can to me.
In the fluorescent light, the circles under his eyes look
like bruises. "There's still time. You should sleep."
Unresisting, he lies back down, but just stares at the needle
on one of the dials as it twitches from side to side. Slowly,
as I would with a wounded animal, my hand stretches out
and brushes a wave of hair from his forehead. He freezes
at my touch, but doesn't recoil. So I continue to gently
smooth back his hair. It's the first time I have voluntarily
touched him since the last arena.
"You're still trying to protect me. Real or not real," he
whispers.
"Real," I answer. It seems to require more explanation.
"Because that's what you and I do. Protect each other."
After a minute or so, he drifts off to sleep.
Shortly before seven, Pollux and I move among the
others, rousing them. There are the usual yawns and sighs
that accompany waking. But my ears are picking up
something else, too. Almost like a hissing. Perhaps it's only
steam escaping a pipe or the far-off whoosh of one of the
trains....
I hush the group to get a better read on it. There's a
hissing, yes, but it's not one extended sound. More like
multiple exhalations that form words. A single word.
Echoing throughout the tunnels. One word. One name.
Repeated over and over again.
"Katniss."
22
The grace period has ended. Perhaps Snow had them
digging through the night. As soon as the fire died down,
anyway. They found Boggs's remains, briefly felt reassured,
and then, as the hours went by without further trophies,
began to suspect. At some point, they realized that they
had been tricked. And President Snow can't tolerate being
made to look like a fool. It doesn't matter whether they
tracked us to the second apartment or assumed we went
directly underground. They know we are down here now
and they've unleashed something, a pack of mutts
probably, bent on finding me.
"Katniss." I jump at the proximity of the sound. Look
frantically for its source, bow loaded, seeking a target to hit.
"Katniss." Peeta's lips are barely moving, but there's no
doubt, the name came out of him. Just when I thought he
seemed a little better, when I thought he might be inching
his way back to me, here is proof of how deep Snow's
poison went. "Katniss." Peeta's programmed to respond to
the hissing chorus, to join in the hunt. He's beginning to stir.
There's no choice. I position my arrow to penetrate his
brain. He'll barely feel a thing. Suddenly, he's sitting up,
eyes wide in alarm, short of breath. "Katniss!" He whips his
head toward me but doesn't seem to notice my bow, the
waiting arrow. "Katniss! Get out of here!"
I hesitate. His voice is alarmed, but not insane. "Why?
What's making that sound?"
"I don't know. Only that it has to kill you," says Peeta.
"Run! Get out! Go!"
After my own moment of confusion, I conclude I do not
have to shoot him. Relax my bowstring. Take in the anxious
faces around me. "Whatever it is, it's after me. It might be a
good time to split up."
"But we're your guard," says Jackson.
"And your crew," adds Cressida.
"I'm not leaving you," Gale says.
I look at the crew, armed with nothing but cameras and
clipboards. And there's Finnick with two guns and a trident.
I suggest that he give one of his guns to Castor. Eject the
blank cartridge from Peeta's, load it with a real one, and
arm Pollux. Since Gale and I have our bows, we hand our
guns over to Messalla and Cressida. There's no time to
show them anything but how to point and pull the trigger, but
in close quarters, that might be enough. It's better than
being defenseless. Now the only one without a weapon is
Peeta, but anyone whispering my name with a bunch of
mutts doesn't need one anyway.
We leave the room free of everything but our scent.
There's no way to erase that at the moment. I'm guessing
that's how the hissing things are tracking us, because we
haven't left much of a physical trail. The mutts' noses will be
abnormally keen, but possibly the time we spent slogging
through water in drainpipes will help throw them.
Outside the hum of the room, the hissing becomes
more distinct. But it's also possible to get a better sense of
the mutts' location. They're behind us, still a fair distance.
Snow probably had them released underground near the
place where he found Boggs's body. Theoretically, we
should have a good lead on them, although they're certain
to be much faster than we are. My mind wanders to the
wolflike creatures in the first arena, the monkeys in the
Quarter Quell, the monstrosities I've witnessed on television
over the years, and I wonder what form these mutts will
take. Whatever Snow thinks will scare me the most.
Pollux and I have worked out a plan for the next leg of
our journey, and since it heads away from the hissing, I see
no reason to alter it. If we move swiftly, maybe we can
reach Snow's mansion before the mutts reach us. But
there's a sloppiness that comes with speed: the poorly
placed boot that results in a splash, the accidental clang of
a gun against a pipe, even my own commands, issued too
loudly for discretion.
We've covered about three more blocks via an
overflow pipe and a section of neglected train track when
the screams begin. Thick, guttural. Bouncing off the tunnel
walls.
"Avoxes," says Peeta immediately. "That's what
Darius sounded like when they tortured him."
"The mutts must have found them," says Cressida.
"So they're not just after Katniss," says Leeg 1.
"They'll probably kill anyone. It's just that they won't stop
until they get to her," says Gale. After his hours studying
with Beetee, he is most likely right.
And here I am again. With people dying because of
me. Friends, allies, complete strangers, losing their lives for
the Mockingjay. "Let me go on alone. Lead them off. I'll
transfer the Holo to Jackson. The rest of you can finish the
mission."
"No one's going to agree to that!" says Jackson in
exasperation.
"We're wasting time!" says Finnick.
"Listen," Peeta whispers.
The screams have stopped, and in their absence my
name has rebounded, startling in its proximity. It's below as
well as behind us now. "Katniss."
I nudge Pollux on the shoulder and we start to run.
Trouble is, we had planned to descend to a lower level, but
that's out now. When we come to the steps leading down,
Pollux and I are scanning for a possible alternative on the
Holo when I start gagging.
"Masks on!" orders Jackson.
There's no need for masks. Everyone is breathing the
same air. I'm the only one losing my stew because I'm the
only one reacting to the odor. Drifting up from the stairwell.
Cutting through the sewage. Roses. I begin to tremble.
I swerve away from the smell and stumble right out
onto the Transfer. Smooth, pastel-colored tiled streets, just
like the ones above, but bordered by white brick walls
instead of homes. A roadway where delivery vehicles can
drive with ease, without the congestion of the Capitol.
Empty now, of everything but us. I swing up my bow and
blow up the first pod with an explosive arrow, which kills the
nest of flesh-eating rats inside. Then I sprint for the next
intersection, where I know one false step will cause the
ground beneath our feet to disintegrate, feeding us into
something labeled Meat Grinder. I shout a warning to the
others to stay with me. I plan for us to skirt around the
corner and then detonate the Meat Grinder, but another
unmarked pod lies in wait.
It happens silently. I would miss it entirely if Finnick
didn't pull me to a stop. "Katniss!"
I whip back around, arrow poised for flight, but what
can be done? Two of Gale's arrows already lie useless
beside the wide shaft of golden light that radiates from
ceiling to floor. Inside, Messalla is as still as a statue,
poised up on the ball of one foot, head tilted back, held
captive by the beam. I can't tell if he's yelling, although his
mouth is stretched wide. We watch, utterly helpless, as the
flesh melts off his body like candle wax.
"Can't help him!" Peeta starts shoving people forward.
"Can't!" Amazingly, he's the only one still functional enough
to get us moving. I don't know why he's in control, when he
should be flipping out and bashing my brains in, but that
could happen any second. At the pressure of his hand
against my shoulder, I turn away from the grisly thing that
was Messalla; I make my feet go forward, fast, so fast that I
can barely skid to a stop before the next intersection.
A spray of gunfire brings down a shower of plaster. I
jerk my head from side to side, looking for the pod, before I
turn and see the squad of Peacekeepers pounding down
the Transfer toward us. With the Meat Grinder pod blocking
our way, there's nothing to do but fire back. They outnumber
us two to one, but we've still got six original members of the
Star Squad, who aren't trying to run and shoot at the same
time.
Fish in a barrel, I think, as blossoms of red stain their
white uniforms. Three-quarters of them are down and dead
when more begin to pour in from the side of the tunnel, the
same one I flung myself through to get away from the smell,
from the--
Those aren't Peacekeepers.
They are white, four-limbed, about the size of a fullgrown
human, but that's where the comparisons stop.
Naked, with long reptilian tails, arched backs, and heads
that jut forward. They swarm over the Peacekeepers, living
and dead, clamp on to their necks with their mouths and rip
off the helmeted heads. Apparently, having a Capitol
pedigree is as useless here as it was in 13. It seems to
take only seconds before the Peacekeepers are
decapitated. The mutts fall to their bellies and skitter toward
us on all fours.
"This way!" I shout, hugging the wall and making a
sharp right turn to avoid the pod. When everyone's joined
me, I fire into the intersection, and the Meat Grinder
activates. Huge mechanical teeth burst through the street
and chew the tile to dust. That should make it impossible
for the mutts to follow us, but I don't know. The wolf and
monkey mutts I've encountered could leap unbelievably far.
The hissing burns my ears, and the reek of roses
makes the walls spin.
I grab Pollux's arm. "Forget the mission. What's the
quickest way aboveground?"
There's no time for checking the Holo. We follow Pollux
for about ten yards along the Transfer and go through a
doorway. I'm aware of tile changing to concrete, of crawling
through a tight, stinking pipe onto a ledge about a foot
wide. We're in the main sewer. A yard below, a poisonous
brew of human waste, garbage, and chemical runoff
bubbles by us. Parts of the surface are on fire, others emit
evil-looking clouds of vapor. One look tells you that if you fall
in, you're never coming out. Moving as quickly as we dare
on the slippery ledge, we make our way to a narrow bridge
and cross it. In an alcove at the far side, Pollux smacks a
ladder with his hand and points up the shaft. This is it. Our
way out.
A quick glance at our party tells me something's off.
"Wait! Where are Jackson and Leeg One?"
"They stayed at the Grinder to hold the mutts back,"
says Homes.
"What?" I'm lunging back for the bridge, willing to leave
no one to those monsters, when he yanks me back.
"Don't waste their lives, Katniss. It's too late for them.
Look!" Homes nods to the pipe, where the mutts are
slithering onto the ledge.
"Stand back!" Gale shouts. With his explosive-tipped
arrows, he rips the far side of the bridge from its
foundation. The rest sinks into the bubbles, just as the mutts
reach it.
For the first time, I get a good look at them. A mix of
human and lizard and who knows what else. White, tight
reptilian skin smeared with gore, clawed hands and feet,
their faces a mess of conflicting features. Hissing, shrieking
my name now, as their bodies contort in rage. Lashing out
with tails and claws, taking huge chunks of one another or
their own bodies with wide, lathered mouths, driven mad by
their need to destroy me. My scent must be as evocative to
them as theirs is to me. More so, because despite its
toxicity, the mutts begin to throw themselves into the foul
sewer.
Along our bank, everyone opens fire. I choose my
arrows without discretion, sending arrowheads, fire,
explosives into the mutts' bodies. They're mortal, but only
just. No natural thing could keep coming with two dozen
bullets in it. Yes, we can eventually kill them, only there are
so many, an endless supply pouring from the pipe, not even
hesitating to take to the sewage.
But it's not their numbers that make my hands shake
so.
No mutt is good. All are meant to damage you. Some
take your life, like the monkeys. Others your reason, like the
tracker jackers. However, the true atrocities, the most
frightening, incorporate a perverse psychological twist
designed to terrify the victim. The sight of the wolf mutts
with the dead tributes' eyes. The sound of the jabberjays
replicating Prim's tortured screams. The smell of Snow's
roses mixed with the victims' blood. Carried across the
sewer. Cutting through even this foulness. Making my heart
run wild, my skin turn to ice, my lungs unable to suck air. It's
as if Snow's breathing right in my face, telling me it's time to
die.
The others are shouting at me, but I can't seem to
respond. Strong arms lift me as I blast the head off a mutt
whose claws have just grazed my ankle. I'm slammed into
the ladder. Hands shoved against the rungs. Ordered to
climb. My wooden, puppet limbs obey. Movement slowly
brings me back to my senses. I detect one person above
me. Pollux. Peeta and Cressida are below. We reach a
platform. Switch to a second ladder. Rungs slick with sweat
and mildew. At the next platform, my head has cleared and
the reality of what's happened hits me. I begin frantically
pulling people up off the ladder. Peeta. Cressida. That's it.
What have I done? What have I abandoned the others
to? I'm scrambling back down the ladder when one of my
boots kicks someone.
"Climb!" Gale barks at me. I'm back up, hauling him in,
peering into the gloom for more. "No." Gale turns my face
to him and shakes his head. Uniform shredded. Gaping
wound in the side of his neck.
There's a human cry from below. "Someone's still
alive," I plead.
"No, Katniss. They're not coming," says Gale. "Only the
mutts are."
Unable to accept it, I shine the light from Cressida's
gun down the shaft. Far below, I can just make out Finnick,
struggling to hang on as three mutts tear at him. As one
yanks back his head to take the death bite, something
bizarre happens. It's as if I'm Finnick, watching images of
my life flash by. The mast of a boat, a silver parachute,
Mags laughing, a pink sky, Beetee's trident, Annie in her
wedding dress, waves breaking over rocks. Then it's over.
I slide the Holo from my belt and choke out "nightlock,
nightlock, nightlock." Release it. Hunch against the wall with
the others as the explosion rocks the platform and bits of
mutt and human flesh shoot out of the pipe and shower us.
There's a clank as Pollux slams a cover over the pipe
and locks it in place. Pollux, Gale, Cressida, Peeta, and
me. We're all that's left. Later, the human feelings will come.
Now I'm conscious only of an animal need to keep the
remnants of our band alive. "We can't stop here."
Someone comes up with a bandage. We tie it around
Gale's neck. Get him to his feet. Only one figure stays
huddled against the wall. "Peeta," I say. There's no
response. Has he blacked out? I crouch in front of him,
pulling his cuffed hands from his face. "Peeta?" His eyes
are like black pools, the pupils dilated so that the blue
irises have all but vanished. The muscles in his wrists are
hard as metal.
"Leave me," he whispers. "I can't hang on."
"Yes. You can!" I tell him.
Peeta shakes his head. "I'm losing it. I'll go mad. Like
them."
Like the mutts. Like a rabid beast bent on ripping my
throat out. And here, finally here in this place, in these
circumstances, I will really have to kill him. And Snow will
win. Hot, bitter hatred courses through me. Snow has won
too much already today.
It's a long shot, it's suicide maybe, but I do the only
thing I can think of. I lean in and kiss Peeta full on the mouth.
His whole body starts shuddering, but I keep my lips
pressed to his until I have to come up for air. My hands
slide up his wrists to clasp his. "Don't let him take you from
me."
Peeta's panting hard as he fights the nightmares
raging in his head. "No. I don't want to..."
I clench his hands to the point of pain. "Stay with me."
His pupils contract to pinpoints, dilate again rapidly,
and then return to something resembling normalcy.
"Always," he murmurs.
I help Peeta up and address Pollux. "How far to the
street?" He indicates it's just above us. I climb the last
ladder and push open the lid to someone's utility room. I'm
rising to my feet when a woman throws open the door. She
wears a bright turquoise silk robe embroidered with exotic
birds. Her magenta hair's fluffed up like a cloud and
decorated with gilded butterflies. Grease from the halfeaten
sausage she's holding smears her lipstick. The
expression on her face says she recognizes me. She
opens her mouth to call for help.
Without hesitation, I shoot her through the heart.
23
Who the woman was calling to remains a mystery,
because after searching the apartment, we find she was
alone. Perhaps her cry was meant for a nearby neighbor, or
was simply an expression of fear. At any rate, there's no
one else to hear her.
This apartment would be a classy place to hole up in
for a while, but that's a luxury we can't afford. "How long do
you think we have before they figure out some of us
could've survived?" I ask.
"I think they could be here anytime," Gale answers.
"They knew we were heading for the streets. Probably the
explosion will throw them for a few minutes, then they'll start
looking for our exit point."
I go to a window that overlooks the street, and when I
peek through the blinds, I'm not faced with Peacekeepers
but with a bundled crowd of people going about their
business. During our underground journey, we have left the
evacuated zones far behind and surfaced in a busy section
of the Capitol. This crowd offers our only chance of escape.
I don't have a Holo, but I have Cressida. She joins me at the
window, confirms she knows our location, and gives me the
good news that we aren't many blocks from the president's
mansion.
One glance at my companions tells me this is no time
for a stealth attack on Snow. Gale's still losing blood from
the neck wound, which we haven't even cleaned. Peeta's
sitting on a velvet sofa with his teeth clamped down on a
pillow, either fighting off madness or containing a scream.
Pollux weeps against the mantel of an ornate fireplace.
Cressida stands determinedly at my side, but she's so pale
her lips are bloodless. I'm running on hate. When the energy
for that ebbs, I'll be worthless.
"Let's check her closets," I say.
In one bedroom we find hundreds of the woman's
outfits, coats, pairs of shoes, a rainbow of wigs, enough
makeup to paint a house. In a bedroom across the hall,
there's a similar selection for men. Perhaps they belong to
her husband. Perhaps to a lover who had the good luck to
be out this morning.
I call the others to dress. At the sight of Peeta's bloody
wrists, I dig in my pocket for the handcuff key, but he jerks
away from me.
"No," he says. "Don't. They help hold me together."
"You might need your hands," says Gale.
"When I feel myself slipping, I dig my wrists into them,
and the pain helps me focus," says Peeta. I let them be.
Fortunately, it's cold out, so we can conceal most of
our uniforms and weapons under flowing coats and cloaks.
We hang our boots around our necks by their laces and
hide them, pull on silly shoes to replace them. The real
challenge, of course, is our faces. Cressida and Pollux run
the risk of being recognized by acquaintances, Gale could
be familiar from the propos and news, and Peeta and I are
known by every citizen of Panem. We hastily help one
another apply thick layers of makeup, pull on wigs and
sunglasses. Cressida wraps scarves over Peeta's and my
mouths and noses.
I can feel the clock ticking away, but stop for just a few
moments to stuff pockets with food and first-aid supplies.
"Stay together," I say at the front door. Then we march right
into the street. Snow flurries have begun to fall. Agitated
people swirl around us, speaking of rebels and hunger and
me in their affected Capitol accents. We cross the street,
pass a few more apartments. Just as we turn the corner,
three dozen Peacekeepers sweep past us. We hop out of
their way, as the real citizens do, wait until the crowd returns
to its normal flow, and keep moving. "Cressida," I whisper.
"Can you think of anywhere?"
"I'm trying," she says.
We cover another block, and the sirens begin. Through
an apartment window, I see an emergency report and
pictures of our faces flashing. They haven't identified who in
our party died yet, because I see Castor and Finnick
among the photos. Soon every passerby will be as
dangerous as a Peacekeeper. "Cressida?"
"There's one place. It's not ideal. But we can try it," she
says. We follow her a few more blocks and turn through a
gate into what looks like a private residence. It's some kind
of shortcut, though, because after walking through a
manicured garden, we come out of another gate onto a
small back street that connects two main avenues. There
are a few poky stores--one that buys used goods, another
that sells fake jewelry. Only a couple of people are around,
and they pay no attention to us. Cressida begins to babble
in a high-pitched voice about fur undergarments, how
essential they are during the cold months. "Wait until you
see the prices! Believe me, it's half what you pay on the
avenues!"
We stop before a grimy storefront filled with
mannequins in furry underwear. The place doesn't even
look open, but Cressida pushes through the front door,
setting off a dissonant chiming. Inside the dim, narrow shop
lined with racks of merchandise, the smell of pelts fills my
nose. Business must be slow, since we're the only
customers. Cressida heads straight for a hunched figure
sitting in the back. I follow, trailing my fingers through the
soft garments as we go.
Behind a counter sits the strangest person I've ever
seen. She's an extreme example of surgical enhancement
gone wrong, for surely not even in the Capitol could they
find this face attractive. The skin has been pulled back
tightly and tattooed with black and gold stripes. The nose
has been flattened until it barely exists. I've seen cat
whiskers on people in the Capitol before, but none so long.
The result is a grotesque, semi-feline mask, which now
squints at us distrustfully.
Cressida takes off her wig, revealing her vines.
"Tigris," she says. "We need help."
Tigris. Deep in my brain, the name rings a bell. She
was a fixture--a younger, less disturbing version of herself--
in the earliest Hunger Games I can remember. A stylist, I
think. I don't remember for which district. Not 12. Then she
must have had one operation too many and crossed the
line into repellence.
So this is where stylists go when they've outlived their
use. To sad theme underwear shops where they wait for
death. Out of the public eye.
I stare at her face, wondering if her parents actually
named her Tigris, inspiring her mutilation, or if she chose
the style and changed her name to match her stripes.
"Plutarch said you could be trusted," adds Cressida.
Great, she's one of Plutarch's people. So if her first
move isn't to turn us in to the Capitol, it will be to notify
Plutarch, and by extension Coin, of our whereabouts. No,
Tigris's shop is not ideal, but it's all we have at the moment.
If she'll even help us. She's peering between an old
television on her counter and us, as if trying to place us. To
help her, I pull down my scarf, remove my wig, and step
closer so that the light of the screen falls on my face.
Tigris gives a low growl, not unlike one Buttercup might
greet me with. She slinks down off her stool and
disappears behind a rack of fur-lined leggings. There's a
sound of sliding, and then her hand emerges and waves us
forward. Cressida looks at me, as if to ask Are you sure?
But what choice do we have? Returning to the streets under
these conditions guarantees our capture or death. I push
around the furs and find Tigris has slid back a panel at the
base of the wall. Behind it seems to be the top of a steep
stone stairway. She gestures for me to enter.
Everything about the situation screams trap. I have a
moment of panic and find myself turning to Tigris, searching
those tawny eyes. Why is she doing this? She's no Cinna,
someone willing to sacrifice herself for others. This woman
was the embodiment of Capitol shallowness. She was one
of the stars of the Hunger Games until...until she wasn't. So
is that it, then? Bitterness? Hatred? Revenge? Actually, I'm
comforted by the idea. A need for revenge can burn long
and hot. Especially if every glance in a mirror reinforces it.
"Did Snow ban you from the Games?" I ask. She just
stares back at me. Somewhere her tiger tail flicks with
displeasure. "Because I'm going to kill him, you know." Her
mouth spreads into what I take for a smile. Reassured that
this isn't complete madness, I crawl through the space.
About halfway down the steps, my face runs into a
hanging chain and I pull it, illuminating the hideout with a
flickering fluorescent bulb. It's a small cellar with no doors or
windows. Shallow and wide. Probably just a strip between
two real basements. A place whose existence could go
unnoticed unless you had a very keen eye for dimensions.
It's cold and dank, with piles of pelts that I'm guessing
haven't seen the light of day in years. Unless Tigris gives us
up, I don't believe anyone will find us here. By the time I
reach the concrete floor, my companions are on the steps.
The panel slides back in place. I hear the underwear rack
being adjusted on squeaky wheels. Tigris padding back to
her stool. We have been swallowed up by her store.
Just in time, too, because Gale looks on the verge of
collapse. We make a bed of pelts, strip off his layers of
weapons, and help him onto his back. At the end of the
cellar, there's a faucet about a foot from the floor with a
drain under it. I turn the tap and, after much sputtering and a
lot of rust, clear water begins to flow. We clean Gale's neck
wound and I realize bandages won't be enough. He's going
to need a few stitches. There's a needle and sterile thread
in the first-aid supplies, but what we lack is a healer. It
crosses my mind to enlist Tigris. As a stylist, she must
know how to work a needle. But that would leave no one
manning the shop, and she's doing enough already. I
accept that I'm probably the most qualified for the job, grit
my teeth, and put in a row of jagged sutures. It's not pretty
but it's functional. I smear it with medicine and wrap it up.
Give him some painkillers. "You can rest now. It's safe
here," I tell him. He goes out like a light.
While Cressida and Pollux make fur nests for each of
us, I attend to Peeta's wrists. Gently rinsing away the blood,
putting on an antiseptic, and bandaging them beneath the
cuffs. "You've got to keep them clean, otherwise the
infection could spread and--"
"I know what blood poisoning is, Katniss," says Peeta.
"Even if my mother isn't a healer."
I'm jolted back in time, to another wound, another set of
bandages. "You said that same thing to me in the first
Hunger Games. Real or not real?"
"Real," he says. "And you risked your life getting the
medicine that saved me?"
"Real." I shrug. "You were the reason I was alive to do
it."
"Was I?" The comment throws him into confusion.
Some shiny memory must be fighting for his attention,
because his body tenses and his newly bandaged wrists
strain against the metal cuffs. Then all the energy saps from
his body. "I'm so tired, Katniss."
"Go to sleep," I say. He won't until I've rearranged his
handcuffs and shackled him to one of the stair supports. It
can't be comfortable, lying there with his arms above his
head. But in a few minutes, he drifts off, too.
Cressida and Pollux have made beds for us, arranged
our food and medical supplies, and now ask what I want to
do about setting up a guard. I look at Gale's pallor, Peeta's
restraints. Pollux hasn't slept for days, and Cressida and I
only napped for a few hours. If a troop of Peacekeepers
were to come through that door, we'd be trapped like rats.
We are completely at the mercy of a decrepit tiger-woman
with what I can only hope is an all-consuming passion for
Snow's death.
"I don't honestly think there's any point in setting up a
guard. Let's just try to get some sleep," I say. They nod
numbly, and we all burrow into our pelts. The fire inside me
has flickered out, and with it my strength. I surrender to the
soft, musty fur and oblivion.
I have only one dream I remember. A long and
wearying thing in which I'm trying to get to District 12. The
home I'm seeking is intact, the people alive. Effie Trinket,
conspicuous in a bright pink wig and tailored outfit, travels
with me. I keep trying to ditch her in places, but she
inexplicably reappears at my side, insisting that as my
escort she's responsible for my staying on schedule. Only
the schedule is constantly shifting, derailed by our lack of a
stamp from an official or delayed when Effie breaks one of
her high heels. We camp for days on a bench in a gray
station in District 7, awaiting a train that never comes.
When I wake, somehow I feel even more drained by this
than my usual nighttime forays into blood and terror.
Cressida, the only person awake, tells me it's late
afternoon. I eat a can of beef stew and wash it down with a
lot of water. Then I lean against the cellar wall, retracing the
events of the last day. Moving death by death. Counting
them up on my fingers. One, two--Mitchell and Boggs lost
on the block. Three--Messalla melted by the pod. Four, five-
-Leeg 1 and Jackson sacrificing themselves at the Meat
Grinder. Six, seven, eight--Castor, Homes, and Finnick
being decapitated by the rose-scented lizard mutts. Eight
dead in twenty-four hours. I know it happened, and yet it
doesn't seem real. Surely, Castor is asleep under that pile
of furs, Finnick will come bounding down the steps in a
minute, Boggs will tell me his plan for our escape.
To believe them dead is to accept I killed them. Okay,
maybe not Mitchell and Boggs--they died on an actual
assignment. But the others lost their lives defending me on
a mission I fabricated. My plot to assassinate Snow seems
so stupid now. So stupid as I sit shivering here in this cellar,
tallying up our losses, fingering the tassels on the silver
knee-high boots I stole from the woman's home. Oh, yeah--I
forgot about that. I killed her, too. I'm taking out unarmed
citizens now.
I think it's time I give myself up.
When everyone finally awakens, I confess. How I lied
about the mission, how I jeopardized everyone in pursuit of
revenge. There's a long silence after I finish. Then Gale
says, "Katniss, we all knew you were lying about Coin
sending you to assassinate Snow."
"You knew, maybe. The soldiers from Thirteen didn't," I
reply."
Do you really think Jackson believed you had orders
from Coin?" Cressida asks. "Of course she didn't. But she
trusted Boggs, and he'd clearly wanted you to go on."
"I never even told Boggs what I planned to do," I say.
"You told everyone in Command!" Gale says. "It was
one of your conditions for being the Mockingjay. 'I kill
Snow.'"
Those seem like two disconnected things. Negotiating
with Coin for the privilege of executing Snow after the war
and this unauthorized flight through the Capitol. "But not like
this," I say. "It's been a complete disaster."
"I think it would be considered a highly successful
mission," says Gale. "We've infiltrated the enemy camp,
showing that the Capitol's defenses can be breached.
We've managed to get footage of ourselves all over the
Capitol's news. We've thrown the whole city into chaos
trying to find us."
"Trust me, Plutarch's thrilled," Cressida adds.
"That's because Plutarch doesn't care who dies," I say.
"Not as long as his Games are a success."
Cressida and Gale go round and round trying to
convince me. Pollux nods at their words to back them up.
Only Peeta doesn't offer an opinion.
"What do you think, Peeta?" I finally ask him.
"I think...you still have no idea. The effect you can
have." He slides his cuffs up the support and pushes
himself to a sitting position. "None of the people we lost
were idiots. They knew what they were doing. They followed
you because they believed you really could kill Snow."
I don't know why his voice reaches me when no one
else's can. But if he's right, and I think he is, I owe the others
a debt that can only be repaid in one way. I pull my paper
map from a pocket in my uniform and spread it out on the
floor with new resolve. "Where are we, Cressida?"
Tigris's shop sits about five blocks from the City Circle
and Snow's mansion. We're in easy walking distance
through a zone in which the pods are deactivated for the
residents' safety. We have disguises that, perhaps with
some embellishments from Tigris's furry stock, could get us
safely there. But then what? The mansion's sure to be
heavily guarded, under round-the-clock camera
surveillance, and laced with pods that could become live at
the flick of a switch.
"What we need is to get him out in the open," Gale
says to me. "Then one of us could pick him off."
"Does he ever appear in public anymore?" asks
Peeta.
"I don't think so," says Cressida. "At least in all the
recent speeches I've seen, he's been in the mansion. Even
before the rebels got here. I imagine he became more
vigilant after Finnick aired his crimes."
That's right. It's not just the Tigrises of the Capitol who
hate Snow now, but a web of people who know what he did
to their friends and families. It would have to be something
bordering on miraculous to lure him out. Something like...
"I bet he'd come out for me," I say. "If I were captured.
He'd want that as public as possible. He'd want my
execution on his front steps." I let this sink in. "Then Gale
could shoot him from the audience."
"No." Peeta shakes his head. "There are too many
alternative endings to that plan. Snow might decide to keep
you and torture information out of you. Or have you
executed publicly without being present. Or kill you inside
the mansion and display your body out front."
"Gale?" I say.
"It seems like an extreme solution to jump to
immediately," he says. "Maybe if all else fails. Let's keep
thinking."
In the quiet that follows, we hear Tigris's soft footfall
overhead. It must be closing time. She's locking up,
fastening the shutters maybe. A few minutes later, the panel
at the top of the stairs slides open.
"Come up," says a gravelly voice. "I have some food
for you." It's the first time she's talked since we arrived.
Whether it's natural or from years of practice, I don't know,
but there's something in her manner of speaking that
suggests a cat's purr.
As we climb the stairs, Cressida asks, "Did you
contact Plutarch, Tigris?"
"No way to." Tigris shrugs. "He'll figure out you're in a
safe house. Don't worry."
Worry? I feel immensely relieved by the news that I
won't be given--and have to ignore--direct orders from 13.
Or make up some viable defense for the decisions I've
made over the last couple of days.
In the shop, the counter holds some stale hunks of
bread, a wedge of moldy cheese, and half a bottle of
mustard. It reminds me that not everyone in the Capitol has
full stomachs these days. I feel obliged to tell Tigris about
our remaining food supplies, but she waves my objections
away. "I eat next to nothing," she says. "And then, only raw
meat." This seems a little too in character, but I don't
question it. I just scrape the mold off the cheese and divide
up the food among the rest of us.
While we eat, we watch the latest Capitol news
coverage. The government has the rebel survivors
narrowed down to the five of us. Huge bounties are offered
for information leading to our capture. They emphasize how
dangerous we are. Show us exchanging gunfire with the
Peacekeepers, although not the mutts ripping off their
heads. Do a tragic tribute to the woman lying where we left
her, with my arrow still in her heart. Someone has redone
her makeup for the cameras.
The rebels let the Capitol broadcast run on
uninterrupted. "Have the rebels made a statement today?" I
ask Tigris. She shakes her head. "I doubt Coin knows what
to do with me now that I'm still alive."
Tigris gives a throaty cackle. "No one knows what to
do with you, girlie." Then she makes me take a pair of the
fur leggings even though I can't pay her for them. It's the
kind of gift you have to accept. And anyway, it's cold in that
cellar.Downstairs after supper, we continue to rack our
brains for a plan. Nothing good comes up, but we do agree
that we can no longer go out as a group of five and that we
should try to infiltrate the president's mansion before I turn
myself into bait. I consent to that second point to avoid
further argument. If I do decide to give myself up, it won't
require anyone else's permission or participation.
We change bandages, handcuff Peeta back to his
support, and settle down to sleep. A few hours later, I slip
back into consciousness and become aware of a quiet
conversation. Peeta and Gale. I can't stop myself from
eavesdropping.
"Thanks for the water," Peeta says.
"No problem," Gale replies. "I wake up ten times a
night anyway."
"To make sure Katniss is still here?" asks Peeta.
"Something like that," Gale admits.
There's a long pause before Peeta speaks again.
"That was funny, what Tigris said. About no one knowing
what to do with her."
"Well, we never have," Gale says.
They both laugh. It's so strange to hear them talking
like this. Almost like friends. Which they're not. Never have
been. Although they're not exactly enemies.
"She loves you, you know," says Peeta. "She as good
as told me after they whipped you."
"Don't believe it," Gale answers. "The way she kissed
you in the Quarter Quell...well, she never kissed me like
that."
"It was just part of the show," Peeta tells him, although
there's an edge of doubt in his voice.
"No, you won her over. Gave up everything for her.
Maybe that's the only way to convince her you love her."
There's a long pause. "I should have volunteered to take
your place in the first Games. Protected her then."
"You couldn't," says Peeta. "She'd never have forgiven
you. You had to take care of her family. They matter more to
her than her life."
"Well, it won't be an issue much longer. I think it's
unlikely all three of us will be alive at the end of the war. And
if we are, I guess it's Katniss's problem. Who to choose."
Gale yawns. "We should get some sleep."
"Yeah." I hear Peeta's handcuffs slide down the
support as he settles in. "I wonder how she'll make up her
mind."
"Oh, that I do know." I can just catch Gale's last words
through the layer of fur. "Katniss will pick whoever she
thinks she can't survive without."
24
A chill runs through me. Am I really that cold and
calculating? Gale didn't say, "Katniss will pick whoever it
will break her heart to give up," or even "whoever she can't
live without." Those would have implied I was motivated by
a kind of passion. But my best friend predicts I will choose
the person who I think I "can't survive without." There's not
the least indication that love, or desire, or even
compatibility will sway me. I'll just conduct an unfeeling
assessment of what my potential mates can offer me. As if
in the end, it will be the question of whether a baker or a
hunter will extend my longevity the most. It's a horrible thing
for Gale to say, for Peeta not to refute. Especially when
every emotion I have has been taken and exploited by the
Capitol or the rebels. At the moment, the choice would be
simple. I can survive just fine without either of them.
In the morning, I have no time or energy to nurse
wounded feelings. During a predawn breakfast of liver pate
and fig cookies, we gather around Tigris's television for
one of Beetee's break-ins. There's been a new
development in the war. Apparently inspired by the black
wave, some enterprising rebel commander came up with
the idea of confiscating people's abandoned automobiles
and sending them unmanned down the streets. The cars
don't trigger every pod, but they certainly get the majority. At
around four in the morning, the rebels began carving three
separate paths--simply referred to as the A, B, and C lines-
-to the Capitol's heart. As a result, they've secured block
after block with very few casualties.
"This can't last," says Gale. "In fact I'm surprised
they've kept it going so long. The Capitol will adjust by
deactivating specific pods and then manually triggering
them when their targets come in range." Almost within
minutes of his prediction, we see this very thing happen onscreen.
A squad sends a car down a block, setting off four
pods. All seems well. Three scouts follow and make it
safely to the end of the street. But when a group of twenty
rebel soldiers follow them, they're blown to bits by a row of
potted rosebushes in front of a flower shop.
"I bet it's killing Plutarch not to be in the control room
on this one," says Peeta.
Beetee gives the broadcast back to the Capitol, where
a grim-faced reporter announces the blocks that civilians
are to evacuate. Between her update and the previous
story, I am able to mark my paper map to show the relative
positions of the opposing armies.
I hear scuffling out on the street, move to the windows,
and peek out a crack in the shutters. In the early morning
light, I see a bizarre spectacle. Refugees from the now
occupied blocks are streaming toward the Capitol's center.
The most panicked are wearing nothing but nightgowns
and slippers, while the more prepared are heavily bundled
in layers of clothes. They carry everything from lapdogs to
jewelry boxes to potted plants. One man in a fluffy robe
holds only an overripe banana. Confused, sleepy children
stumble along after their parents, most either too stunned or
too baffled to cry. Bits of them flash by my line of vision. A
pair of wide brown eyes. An arm clutching a favorite doll. A
pair of bare feet, bluish in the cold, catching on the uneven
paving stones of the alley. Seeing them reminds me of the
children of 12 who died fleeing the firebombs. I leave the
window.
Tigris offers to be our spy for the day since she's the
only one of us without a bounty on her head. After securing
us downstairs, she goes out into the Capitol to pick up any
helpful information.
Down in the cellar I pace back and forth, driving the
others crazy. Something tells me that not taking advantage
of the flood of refugees is a mistake. What better cover
could we have? On the other hand, every displaced person
milling about on the streets means another pair of eyes
looking for the five rebels on the loose. Then again, what do
we gain by staying here? All we're really doing is depleting
our small cache of food and waiting for...what? The rebels
to take the Capitol? It could be weeks before that happens,
and I'm not so sure what I'd do if they did. Not run out and
greet them. Coin would have me whisked back to 13
before I could say "nightlock, nightlock, nightlock." I did not
come all this way, and lose all those people, to turn myself
over to that woman. I kill Snow. Besides, there would be an
awful lot of things I couldn't easily explain about the last few
days. Several of which, if they came to light, would probably
blow my deal for the victors' immunity right out of the water.
And forget about me, I've got a feeling some of the others
are going to need it. Like Peeta. Who, no matter how you
spin it, can be seen on tape tossing Mitchell into that net
pod. I can imagine what Coin's war tribunal will do with that.
By late afternoon, we're beginning to get uneasy about
Tigris's long absence. Talk turns to the possibilities that she
has been apprehended and arrested, turned us in
voluntarily, or simply been injured in the wave of refugees.
But around six o'clock we hear her return. There's some
shuffling around upstairs, then she opens the panel. The
wonderful smell of frying meat fills the air. Tigris has
prepared us a hash of chopped ham and potatoes. It's the
first hot food we've had in days, and as I wait for her to fill
my plate, I'm in danger of actually drooling.
As I chew, I try to pay attention to Tigris telling us how
she acquired it, but the main thing I absorb is that fur
underwear is a valuable trading item at the moment.
Especially for people who left their homes underdressed.
Many are still out on the street, trying to find shelter for the
night. Those who live in the choice apartments of the inner
city have not flung open their doors to house the displaced.
On the contrary, most of them bolted their locks, drew their
shutters, and pretended to be out. Now the City Circle's
packed with refugees, and the Peacekeepers are going
door to door, breaking into places if they have to, to assign
houseguests.
On the television, we watch a terse Head
Peacekeeper lay out specific rules regarding how many
people per square foot each resident will be expected to
take in. He reminds the citizens of the Capitol that
temperatures will drop well below freezing tonight and
warns them that their president expects them to be not only
willing but enthusiastic hosts in this time of crisis. Then they
show some very staged-looking shots of concerned
citizens welcoming grateful refugees into their homes. The
Head Peacekeeper says the president himself has ordered
part of his mansion readied to receive citizens tomorrow.
He adds that shopkeepers should also be prepared to lend
their floor space if requested.
"Tigris, that could be you," says Peeta. I realize he's
right. That even this narrow hallway of a shop could be
appropriated as the numbers swell. Then we'll be truly
trapped in the cellar, in constant danger of discovery. How
many days do we have? One? Maybe two?
The Head Peacekeeper comes back with more
instructions for the population. It seems that this evening
there was an unfortunate incident where a crowd beat to
death a young man who resembled Peeta. Henceforth, all
rebel sightings are to be reported immediately to
authorities, who will deal with the identification and arrest of
the suspect. They show a photo of the victim. Apart from
some obviously bleached curls, he looks about as much
like Peeta as I do.
"People have gone wild," Cressida murmurs.
We watch a brief rebel update in which we learn that
several more blocks have been taken today. I make note of
the intersections on my map and study it. "Line C is only
four blocks from here," I announce. Somehow that fills me
with more anxiety than the idea of Peacekeepers looking
for housing. I become very helpful. "Let me wash the
dishes."
"I'll give you a hand." Gale collects the plates.
I feel Peeta's eyes follow us out of the room. In the
cramped kitchen at the back of Tigris's shop, I fill the sink
with hot water and suds. "Do you think it's true?" I ask. "That
Snow will let refugees into the mansion?"
"I think he has to now, at least for the cameras," says
Gale."
I'm leaving in the morning," I say.
"I'm going with you," Gale says. "What should we do
with the others?"
"Pollux and Cressida could be useful. They're good
guides," I say. Pollux and Cressida aren't actually the
problem. "But Peeta's too..."
"Unpredictable," finishes Gale. "Do you think he'd still
let us leave him behind?"
"We can make the argument that he'll endanger us," I
say. "He might stay here, if we're convincing."
Peeta's fairly rational about our suggestion. He readily
agrees that his company could put the other four of us at
risk. I'm thinking this may all work out, that he can just sit out
the war in Tigris's cellar, when he announces he's going out
on his own.
"To do what?" asks Cressida.
"I'm not sure exactly. The one thing that I might still be
useful at is causing a diversion. You saw what happened to
that man who looked like me," he says.
"What if you...lose control?" I say.
"You mean...go mutt? Well, if I feel that coming on, I'll
try to get back here," he assures me.
"And if Snow gets you again?" asks Gale. "You don't
even have a gun."
"I'll just have to take my chances," says Peeta. "Like
the rest of you." The two exchange a long look, and then
Gale reaches into his breast pocket. He places his
nightlock tablet in Peeta's hand. Peeta lets it lie on his open
palm, neither rejecting nor accepting it. "What about you?"
"Don't worry. Beetee showed me how to detonate my
explosive arrows by hand. If that fails, I've got my knife. And
I'll have Katniss," says Gale with a smile. "She won't give
them the satisfaction of taking me alive."
The thought of Peacekeepers dragging Gale away
starts the tune playing in my head again....
Are you, are you
Coming to the tree
"Take it, Peeta," I say in a strained voice. I reach out
and close his fingers over the pill. "No one will be there to
help you."
We spend a fitful night, woken by one another's
nightmares, minds buzzing with the next day's plans. I'm
relieved when five o'clock rolls around and we can begin
whatever this day holds for us. We eat a mishmash of our
remaining food--canned peaches, crackers, and snails--
leaving one can of salmon for Tigris as meager thanks for
all she's done. The gesture seems to touch her in some
way. Her face contorts in an odd expression and she flies
into action. She spends the next hour remaking the five of
us. She redresses us so regular clothes hide our uniforms
before we even don our coats and cloaks. Covers our
military boots with some sort of furry slippers. Secures our
wigs with pins. Cleans off the garish remains of the paint
we so hastily applied to our faces and makes us up again.
Drapes our outerwear to conceal our weapons. Then gives
us handbags and bundles of knickknacks to carry. In the
end, we look exactly like the refugees fleeing the rebels.
"Never underestimate the power of a brilliant stylist,"
says Peeta. It's hard to tell, but I think Tigris might actually
blush under her stripes.
There are no helpful updates on the television, but the
alley seems as thick with refugees as the previous morning.
Our plan is to slip into the crowd in three groups. First
Cressida and Pollux, who will act as guides while keeping
a safe lead on us. Then Gale and myself, who intend to
position ourselves among the refugees assigned to the
mansion today. Then Peeta, who will trail behind us, ready
to create a disturbance as needed.
Tigris watches through the shutters for the right
moment, unbolts the door, and nods to Cressida and
Pollux. "Take care," Cressida says, and they are gone.
We'll be following in a minute. I get out the key, unlock
Peeta's cuffs, and stuff them in my pocket. He rubs his
wrists. Flexes them. I feel a kind of desperation rising up in
me. It's like I'm back in the Quarter Quell, with Beetee giving
Johanna and me that coil of wire.
"Listen," I say. "Don't do anything foolish."
"No. It's last-resort stuff. Completely," he says.
I wrap my arms around his neck, feel his arms hesitate
before they embrace me. Not as steady as they once were,
but still warm and strong. A thousand moments surge
through me. All the times these arms were my only refuge
from the world. Perhaps not fully appreciated then, but so
sweet in my memory, and now gone forever. "All right,
then." I release him.
"It's time," says Tigris. I kiss her cheek, fasten my red
hooded cloak, pull my scarf up over my nose, and follow
Gale out into the frigid air.
Sharp, icy snowflakes bite my exposed skin. The rising
sun's trying to break through the gloom without much
success. There's enough light to see the bundled forms
closest to you and little more. Perfect conditions, really,
except that I can't locate Cressida and Pollux. Gale and I
drop our heads and shuffle along with the refugees. I can
hear what I missed peeking through the shutters yesterday.
Crying, moaning, labored breathing. And, not too far away,
gunfire.
"Where are we going, Uncle?" a shivering little boy
asks a man weighed down with a small safe.
"To the president's mansion. They'll assign us a new
place to live," puffs the man.
We turn off the alley and spill out onto one of the main
avenues. "Stay to the right!" a voice orders, and I see the
Peacekeepers interspersed throughout the crowd,
directing the flow of human traffic. Scared faces peer out of
the plate-glass windows of the shops, which are already
becoming overrun with refugees. At this rate, Tigris may
have new houseguests by lunch. It was good for everybody
that we got out when we did.
It's brighter now, even with the snow picking up. I catch
sight of Cressida and Pollux about thirty yards ahead of us,
plodding along with the crowd. I crane my head around to
see if I can locate Peeta. I can't, but I've caught the eye of
an inquisitive-looking little girl in a lemon yellow coat. I
nudge Gale and slow my pace ever so slightly, to allow a
wall of people to form between us.
"We might need to split up," I say under my breath.
"There's a girl--"
Gunfire rips through the crowd, and several people
near me slump to the ground. Screams pierce the air as a
second round mows down another group behind us. Gale
and I drop to the street, scuttle the ten yards to the shops,
and take cover behind a display of spike-heeled boots
outside a shoe seller's.
A row of feathery footwear blocks Gale's view. "Who is
it? Can you see?" he asks me. What I can see, between
alternating pairs of lavender and mint green leather boots,
is a street full of bodies. The little girl who was watching me
kneels beside a motionless woman, screeching and trying
to rouse her. Another wave of bullets slices across the
chest of her yellow coat, staining it with red, knocking the
girl onto her back. For a moment, looking at her tiny
crumpled form, I lose my ability to form words. Gale prods
me with his elbow. "Katniss?"
"They're shooting from the roof above us," I tell Gale. I
watch a few more rounds, see the white uniforms dropping
into the snowy streets. "Trying to take out the
Peacekeepers, but they're not exactly crack shots. It must
be the rebels." I don't feel a rush of joy, although
theoretically my allies have broken through. I am transfixed
by that lemon yellow coat.
"If we start shooting, that's it," Gale says. "The whole
world will know it's us."
It's true. We're armed only with our fabulous bows. To
release an arrow would be like announcing to both sides
that we're here.
"No," I say forcefully. "We've got to get to Snow."
"Then we better start moving before the whole block
goes up," says Gale. Hugging the wall, we continue along
the street. Only the wall is mostly shopwindows. A pattern of
sweaty palms and gaping faces presses against the glass.
I yank my scarf up higher over my cheekbones as we dart
between outdoor displays. Behind a rack of framed photos
of Snow, we encounter a wounded Peacekeeper propped
against a strip of brick wall. He asks us for help. Gale
knees him in the side of the head and takes his gun. At the
intersection, he shoots a second Peacekeeper and we
both have firearms.
"So who are we supposed to be now?" I ask.
"Desperate citizens of the Capitol," says Gale. "The
Peacekeepers will think we're on their side, and hopefully
the rebels have more interesting targets."
I'm mulling over the wisdom of this latest role as we
sprint across the intersection, but by the time we reach the
next block, it no longer matters who we are. Who anyone is.
Because no one is looking at faces. The rebels are here, all
right. Pouring onto the avenue, taking cover in doorways,
behind vehicles, guns blazing, hoarse voices shouting
commands as they prepare to meet an army of
Peacekeepers marching toward us. Caught in the cross
fire are the refugees, unarmed, disoriented, many
wounded.
A pod's activated ahead of us, releasing a gush of
steam that parboils everyone in its path, leaving the victims
intestine-pink and very dead. After that, what little sense of
order there was unravels. As the remaining curlicues of
steam intertwine with the snow, visibility extends just to the
end of my barrel. Peacekeeper, rebel, citizen, who knows?
Everything that moves is a target. People shoot reflexively,
and I'm no exception. Heart pounding, adrenaline burning
through me, everyone is my enemy. Except Gale. My
hunting partner, the one person who has my back. There's
nothing to do but move forward, killing whoever comes into
our path. Screaming people, bleeding people, dead people
everywhere. As we reach the next corner, the entire block
ahead of us lights up with a rich purple glow. We
backpedal, hunker down in a stairwell, and squint into the
light. Something's happening to those illuminated by it.
They're assaulted by...what? A sound? A wave? A laser?
Weapons fall from their hands, fingers clutch their faces, as
blood sprays from all visible orifices--eyes, noses, mouths,
ears. In less than a minute, everyone's dead and the glow
vanishes. I grit my teeth and run, leaping over the bodies,
feet slipping in the gore. The wind whips the snow into
blinding swirls but doesn't block out the sound of another
wave of boots headed our way.
"Get down!" I hiss at Gale. We drop where we are. My
face lands in a still-warm pool of someone's blood, but I
play dead, remain motionless as the boots march over us.
Some avoid the bodies. Others grind into my hand, my
back, kick my head in passing. As the boots recede, I open
my eyes and nod to Gale.
On the next block, we encounter more terrified
refugees, but few soldiers. Just when it seems we might
have caught a break, there's a cracking sound, like an egg
hitting the side of a bowl but magnified a thousand times.
We stop, look around for the pod. There's nothing. Then I
feel the tips of my boots beginning to tilt ever so slightly.
"Run!" I cry to Gale. There's no time to explain, but in a few
seconds the nature of the pod becomes clear to everyone.
A seam has opened up down the center of the block. The
two sides of the tiled street are folding down like flaps,
slowly emptying the people into whatever lies beneath.
I'm torn between making a beeline for the next
intersection and trying to get to the doors that line the street
and break my way into a building. As a result, I end up
moving at a slight diagonal. As the flap continues to drop, I
find my feet scrambling, harder and harder, to find
purchase on the slippery tiles. It's like running along the
side of an icy hill that gets steeper at every step. Both of my
destinations--the intersection and the buildings--are a few
feet away when I feel the flap going. There's nothing to do
but use my last seconds of connection to the tiles to push
off for the intersection. As my hands latch on to the side, I
realize the flaps have swung straight down. My feet dangle
in the air, no foothold anywhere. From fifty feet below, a vile
stench hits my nose, like rotted corpses in the summer
heat. Black forms crawl around in the shadows, silencing
whoever survives the fall.
A strangled cry comes from my throat. No one is
coming to help me. I'm losing my grip on the icy ledge,
when I see I'm only about six feet from the corner of the pod.
I inch my hands along the ledge, trying to block out the
terrifying sounds from below. When my hands straddle the
corner, I swing my right boot up over the side. It catches on
something and I painstakingly drag myself up to street level.
Panting, trembling, I crawl out and wrap my arm around a
lamppost for an anchor, although the ground's perfectly flat.
"Gale?" I call into the abyss, heedless of being
recognized. "Gale?"
"Over here!" I look in bewilderment to my left. The flap
held up everything to the very base of the buildings. A
dozen or so people made it that far and now hang from
whatever provides a handhold. Doorknobs, knockers, mail
slots. Three doors down from me, Gale clings to the
decorative iron grating around an apartment door. He could
easily get inside if it was open. But despite repeated kicks
to the door, no one comes to his aid.
"Cover yourself!" I lift my gun. He turns away and I drill
the lock until the door flies inward. Gale swings into the
doorway, landing in a heap on the floor. For a moment, I
experience the elation of his rescue. Then the white-gloved
hands clamp down on him.
Gale meets my eyes, mouths something at me I can't
make out. I don't know what to do. I can't leave him, but I
can't reach him either. His lips move again. I shake my
head to indicate my confusion. At any minute, they'll realize
who they've captured. The Peacekeepers are hauling him
inside now. "Go!" I hear him yell.
I turn and run away from the pod. All alone now. Gale a
prisoner. Cressida and Pollux could be dead ten times
over. And Peeta? I haven't laid eyes on him since we left
Tigris's. I hold on to the idea that he may have gone back.
Felt an attack coming and retreated to the cellar while he
still had control. Realized there was no need for a diversion
when the Capitol has provided so many. No need to be bait
and have to take the nightlock--the nightlock! Gale doesn't
have any. And as for all that talk of detonating his arrows by
hand, he'll never get the chance. The first thing the
Peacekeepers will do is to strip him of his weapons.
I fall into a doorway, tears stinging my eyes. Shoot me.
That's what he was mouthing. I was supposed to shoot him!
That was my job. That was our unspoken promise, all of us,
to one another. And I didn't do it and now the Capitol will kill
him or torture him or hijack him or--the cracks begin
opening inside me, threatening to break me into pieces. I
have only one hope. That the Capitol falls, lays down its
arms, and gives up its prisoners before they hurt Gale. But I
can't see that happening while Snow's alive.
A pair of Peacekeepers runs by, barely glancing at the
whimpering Capitol girl huddled in a doorway. I choke down
my tears, wipe the existing ones off my face before they
can freeze, and pull myself back together. Okay, I'm still an
anonymous refugee. Or did the Peacekeepers who caught
Gale get a glimpse of me as I fled? I remove my cloak and
turn it inside out, letting the black lining show instead of the
red exterior. Arrange the hood so it conceals my face.
Grasping my gun close to my chest, I survey the block.
There's only a handful of dazed-looking stragglers. I trail
close behind a pair of old men who take no notice of me.
No one will expect me to be with old men. When we reach
the end of the next intersection, they stop and I almost
bump into them. It's the City Circle. Across the wide
expanse ringed by grand buildings sits the president's
mansion.
The Circle's full of people milling around, wailing, or
just sitting and letting the snow pile up around them. I fit
right in. I begin to weave my way across to the mansion,
tripping over abandoned treasures and snow-frosted limbs.
About halfway there, I become aware of the concrete
barricade. It's about four feet high and extends in a large
rectangle in front of the mansion. You would think it would
be empty, but it's packed with refugees. Maybe this is the
group that's been chosen to be sheltered at the mansion?
But as I draw closer, I notice something else. Everyone
inside the barricade is a child. Toddlers to teenagers.
Scared and frostbitten. Huddled in groups or rocking
numbly on the ground. They aren't being led into the
mansion. They're penned in, guarded on all sides by
Peacekeepers. I know immediately it's not for their
protection. If the Capitol wanted to safeguard them, they'd
be down in a bunker somewhere. This is for Snow's
protection. The children form his human shield.
There's a commotion and the crowd surges to the left.
I'm caught up by larger bodies, borne sideways, carried off
course. I hear shouts of "The rebels! The rebels!" and know
they must've broken through. The momentum slams me into
a flagpole and I cling to it. Using the rope that hangs from
the top, I pull myself up out of the crush of bodies. Yes, I can
see the rebel army pouring into the Circle, driving the
refugees back onto the avenues. I scan the area for the
pods that will surely be detonating. But that doesn't happen.
This is what happens:
A hovercraft marked with the Capitol's seal
materializes directly over the barricaded children. Scores
of silver parachutes rain down on them. Even in this chaos,
the children know what silver parachutes contain. Food.
Medicine. Gifts. They eagerly scoop them up, frozen fingers
struggling with the strings. The hovercraft vanishes, five
seconds pass, and then about twenty parachutes
simultaneously explode.
A wail rises from the crowd. The snow's red and
littered with undersized body parts. Many of the children die
immediately, but others lie in agony on the ground. Some
stagger around mutely, staring at the remaining silver
parachutes in their hands, as if they still might have
something precious inside. I can tell the Peacekeepers
didn't know this was coming by the way they are yanking
away the barricades, making a path to the children. Another
flock of white uniforms sweeps into the opening. But these
aren't Peacekeepers. They're medics. Rebel medics. I'd
know the uniforms anywhere. They swarm in among the
children, wielding medical kits.
First I get a glimpse of the blond braid down her back.
Then, as she yanks off her coat to cover a wailing child, I
notice the duck tail formed by her untucked shirt. I have the
same reaction I did the day Effie Trinket called her name at
the reaping. At least, I must go limp, because I find myself
at the base of the flagpole, unable to account for the last
few seconds. Then I am pushing through the crowd, just as I
did before. Trying to shout her name above the roar. I'm
almost there, almost to the barricade, when I think she
hears me. Because for just a moment, she catches sight of
me, her lips form my name.
And that's when the rest of the parachutes go off.
25
Real or not real? I am on fire. The balls of flame that
erupted from the parachutes shot over the barricades,
through the snowy air, and landed in the crowd. I was just
turning away when one caught me, ran its tongue up the
back of my body, and transformed me into something new.
A creature as unquenchable as the sun.
A fire mutt knows only a single sensation: agony. No
sight, no sound, no feeling except the unrelenting burning of
flesh. Perhaps there are periods of unconsciousness, but
what can it matter if I can't find refuge in them? I am Cinna's
bird, ignited, flying frantically to escape something
inescapable. The feathers of flame that grow from my body.
Beating my wings only fans the blaze. I consume myself, but
to no end.
Finally, my wings begin to falter, I lose height, and
gravity pulls me into a foamy sea the color of Finnick's
eyes. I float on my back, which continues to burn beneath
the water, but the agony quiets to pain. When I am adrift
and unable to navigate, that's when they come. The dead.
The ones I loved fly as birds in the open sky above me.
Soaring, weaving, calling to me to join them. I want so badly
to follow them, but the seawater saturates my wings,
making it impossible to lift them. The ones I hated have
taken to the water, horrible scaled things that tear my salty
flesh with needle teeth. Biting again and again. Dragging
me beneath the surface.
The small white bird tinged in pink dives down, buries
her claws in my chest, and tries to keep me afloat. "No,
Katniss! No! You can't go!"
But the ones I hated are winning, and if she clings to
me, she'll be lost as well. "Prim, let go!" And finally she
does.Deep in the water, I'm deserted by all. There's only the
sound of my breathing, the enormous effort it takes to draw
the water in, push it out of my lungs. I want to stop, I try to
hold my breath, but the sea forces its way in and out
against my will. "Let me die. Let me follow the others," I
beg whatever holds me here. There's no response.
Trapped for days, years, centuries maybe. Dead, but
not allowed to die. Alive, but as good as dead. So alone
that anyone, anything no matter how loathsome would be
welcome. But when I finally have a visitor, it's sweet.
Morphling. Coursing through my veins, easing the pain,
lightening my body so that it rises back toward the air and
rests again on the foam.
Foam. I really am floating on foam. I can feel it beneath
the tips of my fingers, cradling parts of my naked body.
There's much pain but there's also something like reality.
The sandpaper of my throat. The smell of burn medicine
from the first arena. The sound of my mother's voice. These
things frighten me, and I try to return to the deep to make
sense of them. But there's no going back. Gradually, I'm
forced to accept who I am. A badly burned girl with no
wings. With no fire. And no sister.
In the dazzling white Capitol hospital, the doctors work
their magic on me. Draping my rawness in new sheets of
skin. Coaxing the cells into thinking they are my own.
Manipulating my body parts, bending and stretching the
limbs to assure a good fit. I hear over and over again how
lucky I am. My eyes were spared. Most of my face was
spared. My lungs are responding to treatment. I will be as
good as new.
When my tender skin has toughened enough to
withstand the pressure of sheets, more visitors arrive. The
morphling opens the door to the dead and alive alike.
Haymitch, yellow and unsmiling. Cinna, stitching a new
wedding dress. Delly, prattling on about the niceness of
people. My father sings all four stanzas of "The Hanging
Tree" and reminds me that my mother--who sleeps in a
chair between shifts--isn't to know about it.
One day I awake to expectations and know I will not be
allowed to live in my dreamland. I must take food by mouth.
Move my own muscles. Make my way to the bathroom. A
brief appearance by President Coin clinches it.
"Don't worry," she says. "I've saved him for you."
The doctors' puzzlement grows over why I'm unable to
speak. Many tests are done, and while there's damage to
my vocal cords, it doesn't account for it. Finally, Dr.
Aurelius, a head doctor, comes up with the theory that I've
become a mental, rather than physical, Avox. That my
silence has been brought on by emotional trauma. Although
he's presented with a hundred proposed remedies, he tells
them to leave me alone. So I don't ask about anyone or
anything, but people bring me a steady stream of
information. On the war: The Capitol fell the day the
parachutes went off, President Coin leads Panem now, and
troops have been sent out to put down the small remaining
pockets of Capitol resistance. On President Snow: He's
being held prisoner, awaiting trial and most certain
execution. On my assassination team: Cressida and Pollux
have been sent out into the districts to cover the wreckage
of the war. Gale, who took two bullets in an escape attempt,
is mopping up Peacekeepers in 2. Peeta's still in the burn
unit. He made it to the City Circle after all. On my family: My
mother buries her grief in her work.
Having no work, grief buries me. All that keeps me
going is Coin's promise. That I can kill Snow. And when
that's done, nothing will be left.
Eventually, I'm released from the hospital and given a
room in the president's mansion to share with my mother.
She's almost never there, taking her meals and sleeping at
work. It falls to Haymitch to check on me, make sure I'm
eating and using my medicines. It's not an easy job. I take
to my old habits from District 13. Wandering unauthorized
through the mansion. Into bedrooms and offices, ballrooms
and baths. Seeking strange little hiding spaces. A closet of
furs. A cabinet in the library. A long-forgotten bathtub in a
room of discarded furniture. My places are dim and quiet
and impossible to find. I curl up, make myself smaller, try to
disappear entirely. Wrapped in silence, I slide my bracelet
that reads mentally disoriented around and around my
wrist.
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. There is no District 12. I am
the Mockingjay. I brought down the Capitol. President
Snow hates me. He killed my sister. Now I will kill him.
And then the Hunger Games will be over....
Periodically, I find myself back in my room, unsure
whether I was driven by a need for morphling or if Haymitch
ferreted me out. I eat the food, take the medicine, and am
required to bathe. It's not the water I mind, but the mirror
that reflects my naked fire-mutt body. The skin grafts still
retain a newborn-baby pinkness. The skin deemed
damaged but salvageable looks red, hot, and melted in
places. Patches of my former self gleam white and pale. I'm
like a bizarre patchwork quilt of skin. Parts of my hair were
singed off completely; the rest has been chopped off at odd
lengths. Katniss Everdeen, the girl who was on fire. I
wouldn't much care except the sight of my body brings back
the memory of the pain. And why I was in pain. And what
happened just before the pain started. And how I watched
my little sister become a human torch.
Closing my eyes doesn't help. Fire burns brighter in
the darkness.
Dr. Aurelius shows up sometimes. I like him because
he doesn't say stupid things like how I'm totally safe, or that
he knows I can't see it but I'll be happy again one day, or
even that things will be better in Panem now. He just asks if
I feel like talking, and when I don't answer, he falls asleep in
his chair. In fact, I think his visits are largely motivated by his
need for a nap. The arrangement works for both of us.
The time draws near, although I could not give you
exact hours and minutes. President Snow has been tried
and found guilty, sentenced to execution. Haymitch tells me,
I hear talk of it as I drift past the guards in the hallways. My
Mockingjay suit arrives in my room. Also my bow, looking
no worse for wear, but no sheath of arrows. Either because
they were damaged or more likely because I shouldn't have
weapons. I vaguely wonder if I should be preparing for the
event in some way, but nothing comes to mind.
Late one afternoon, after a long period in a cushioned
window seat behind a painted screen, I emerge and turn
left instead of right. I find myself in a strange part of the
mansion, and immediately lose my bearings. Unlike the
area where I'm quartered, there seems to be no one around
to ask. I like it, though. Wish I'd found it sooner. It's so quiet,
with the thick carpets and heavy tapestries soaking up the
sound. Softly lit. Muted colors. Peaceful. Until I smell the
roses. I dive behind some curtains, shaking too hard to run,
while I await the mutts. Finally, I realize there are no mutts
coming. So, what do I smell? Real roses? Could it be that I
am near the garden where the evil things grow?
As I creep down the hall, the odor becomes
overpowering. Perhaps not as strong as the actual mutts,
but purer, because it's not competing with sewage and
explosives. I turn a corner and find myself staring at two
surprised guards. Not Peacekeepers, of course. There are
no more Peacekeepers. But not the trim, gray-uniformed
soldiers from 13 either. These two, a man and a woman,
wear the tattered, thrown-together clothes of actual rebels.
Still bandaged and gaunt, they are now keeping watch over
the doorway to the roses. When I move to enter, their guns
form an X in front of me.
"You can't go in, miss," says the man.
"Soldier," the woman corrects him. "You can't go in,
Soldier Everdeen. President's orders."
I just stand there patiently waiting for them to lower
their guns, for them to understand, without my telling them,
that behind those doors is something I need. Just a rose. A
single bloom. To place in Snow's lapel before I shoot him.
My presence seems to worry the guards. They're
discussing calling Haymitch, when a woman speaks up
behind me. "Let her go in."
I know the voice but can't immediately place it. Not
Seam, not 13, definitely not Capitol. I turn my head and find
myself face-to-face with Paylor, the commander from 8.
She looks even more beat up than she did at the hospital,
but who doesn't?
"On my authority," says Paylor. "She has a right to
anything behind that door." These are her soldiers, not
Coin's. They drop their weapons without question and let
me pass.
At the end of a short hallway, I push apart the glass
doors and step inside. By now the smell's so strong that it
begins to flatten out, as if there's no more my nose can
absorb. The damp, mild air feels good on my hot skin. And
the roses are glorious. Row after row of sumptuous blooms,
in lush pink, sunset orange, and even pale blue. I wander
through the aisles of carefully pruned plants, looking but not
touching, because I have learned the hard way how deadly
these beauties can be. I know when I find it, crowning the
top of a slender bush. A magnificent white bud just
beginning to open. I pull my left sleeve over my hand so that
my skin won't actually have to touch it, take up a pair of
pruning shears, and have just positioned them on the stem
when he speaks.
"That's a nice one."
My hand jerks, the shears snap shut, severing the
stem.
"The colors are lovely, of course, but nothing says
perfection like white."
I still can't see him, but his voice seems to rise up from
an adjacent bed of red roses. Delicately pinching the stem
of the bud through the fabric of my sleeve, I move slowly
around the corner and find him sitting on a stool against the
wall. He's as well groomed and finely dressed as ever, but
weighted down with manacles, ankle shackles, tracking
devices. In the bright light, his skin's a pale, sickly green.
He holds a white handkerchief spotted with fresh blood.
Even in his deteriorated state, his snake eyes shine bright
and cold. "I was hoping you'd find your way to my quarters."
His quarters. I have trespassed into his home, the way
he slithered into mine last year, hissing threats with his
bloody, rosy breath. This greenhouse is one of his rooms,
perhaps his favorite; perhaps in better times he tended the
plants himself. But now it's part of his prison. That's why the
guards halted me. And that's why Paylor let me in.
I'd supposed he would be secured in the deepest
dungeon that the Capitol had to offer, not cradled in the lap
of luxury. Yet Coin left him here. To set a precedent, I
guess. So that if in the future she ever fell from grace, it
would be understood that presidents--even the most
despicable--get special treatment. Who knows, after all,
when her own power might fade?
"There are so many things we should discuss, but I
have a feeling your visit will be brief. So, first things first."
He begins to cough, and when he removes the
handkerchief from his mouth, it's redder. "I wanted to tell
you how very sorry I am about your sister."
Even in my deadened, drugged condition, this sends a
stab of pain through me. Reminding me that there are no
limits to his cruelty. And how he will go to his grave trying to
destroy me.
"So wasteful, so unnecessary. Anyone could see the
game was over by that point. In fact, I was just about to
issue an official surrender when they released those
parachutes." His eyes are glued on me, unblinking, so as
not to miss a second of my reaction. But what he's said
makes no sense. When they released the parachutes?
"Well, you really didn't think I gave the order, did you?
Forget the obvious fact that if I'd had a working hovercraft at
my disposal, I'd have been using it to make an escape. But
that aside, what purpose could it have served? We both
know I'm not above killing children, but I'm not wasteful. I
take life for very specific reasons. And there was no reason
for me to destroy a pen full of Capitol children. None at all."
I wonder if the next fit of coughing is staged so that I
can have time to absorb his words. He's lying. Of course,
he's lying. But there's something struggling to free itself
from the lie as well.
"However, I must concede it was a masterful move on
Coin's part. The idea that I was bombing our own helpless
children instantly snapped whatever frail allegiance my
people still felt to me. There was no real resistance after
that. Did you know it aired live? You can see Plutarch's
hand there. And in the parachutes. Well, it's that sort of
thinking that you look for in a Head Gamemaker, isn't it?"
Snow dabs the corners of his mouth. "I'm sure he wasn't
gunning for your sister, but these things happen."
I'm not with Snow now. I'm in Special Weaponry back
in 13 with Gale and Beetee. Looking at the designs based
on Gale's traps. That played on human sympathies. The
first bomb killed the victims. The second, the rescuers.
Remembering Gale's words.
"Beetee and I have been following the same rule
book President Snow used when he hijacked Peeta."
"My failure," says Snow, "was being so slow to grasp
Coin's plan. To let the Capitol and districts destroy one
another, and then step in to take power with Thirteen barely
scratched. Make no mistake, she was intending to take my
place right from the beginning. I shouldn't be surprised.
After all, it was Thirteen that started the rebellion that led to
the Dark Days, and then abandoned the rest of the districts
when the tide turned against it. But I wasn't watching Coin. I
was watching you, Mockingjay. And you were watching me.
I'm afraid we have both been played for fools."
I refuse for this to be true. Some things even I can't
survive. I utter my first words since my sister's death. "I don't
believe you."
Snow shakes his head in mock disappointment. "Oh,
my dear Miss Everdeen. I thought we had agreed not to lie
to each other."
26
Out in the hall, I find Paylor standing in exactly the
same spot. "Did you find what you were looking for?" she
asks.
I hold up the white bud in answer and then stumble
past her. I must have made it back to my room, because
the next thing I know, I'm filling a glass with water from the
bathroom faucet and sticking the rose in it. I sink to my
knees on the cold tile and squint at the flower, as the
whiteness seems hard to focus on in the stark fluorescent
light. My finger catches the inside of my bracelet, twisting it
like a tourniquet, hurting my wrist. I'm hoping the pain will
help me hang on to reality the way it did for Peeta. I must
hang on. I must know the truth about what has happened.
There are two possibilities, although the details
associated with them may vary. First, as I've believed, that
the Capitol sent in that hovercraft, dropped the parachutes,
and sacrificed its children's lives, knowing the recently
arrived rebels would go to their aid. There's evidence to
support this. The Capitol's seal on the hovercraft, the lack of
any attempt to blow the enemy out of the sky, and their long
history of using children as pawns in their battle against the
districts. Then there's Snow's account. That a Capitol
hovercraft manned by rebels bombed the children to bring
a speedy end to the war. But if this was the case, why didn't
the Capitol fire on the enemy? Did the element of surprise
throw them? Had they no defenses left? Children are
precious to 13, or so it has always seemed. Well, not me,
maybe. Once I had outlived my usefulness, I was
expendable. Although I think it's been a long time since I've
been considered a child in this war. And why would they do
it knowing their own medics would likely respond and be
taken out by the second blast? They wouldn't. They couldn't.
Snow's lying. Manipulating me as he always has. Hoping to
turn me against the rebels and possibly destroy them. Yes.
Of course.
Then what's nagging at me? Those double-exploding
bombs, for one. It's not that the Capitol couldn't have the
same weapon, it's just that I'm sure the rebels did. Gale and
Beetee's brainchild. Then there's the fact that Snow made
no escape attempt, when I know him to be the consummate
survivor. It seems hard to believe he didn't have a retreat
somewhere, some bunker stocked with provisions where
he could live out the rest of his snaky little life. And finally,
there's his assessment of Coin. What's irrefutable is that
she's done exactly what he said. Let the Capitol and the
districts run one another into the ground and then sauntered
in to take power. Even if that was her plan, it doesn't mean
she dropped those parachutes. Victory was already in her
grasp. Everything was in her grasp.
Except me.
I recall Boggs's response when I admitted I hadn't put
much thought into Snow's successor. "If your immediate
answer isn't Coin, then you're a threat. You're the face of
the rebellion. You may have more influence than any
other single person. Outwardly, the most you've ever done
is tolerated her."
Suddenly, I'm thinking of Prim, who was not yet
fourteen, not yet old enough to be granted the title of
soldier, but somehow working on the front lines. How did
such a thing happen? That my sister would have wanted to
be there, I have no doubt. That she would be more capable
than many older than she is a given. But for all that,
someone very high up would have had to approve putting a
thirteen-year-old in combat. Did Coin do it, hoping that
losing Prim would push me completely over the edge? Or,
at least, firmly on her side? I wouldn't even have had to
witness it in person. Numerous cameras would be covering
the City Circle. Capturing the moment forever.
No, now I am going crazy, slipping into some state of
paranoia. Too many people would know of the mission.
Word would get out. Or would it? Who would have to know
besides Coin, Plutarch, and a small, loyal or easily
disposable crew?
I badly need help working this out, only everyone I trust
is dead. Cinna. Boggs. Finnick. Prim. There's Peeta, but
he couldn't do any more than speculate, and who knows
what state his mind's in, anyway. And that leaves only Gale.
He's far away, but even if he were beside me, could I
confide in him? What could I say, how could I phrase it,
without implying that it was his bomb that killed Prim? The
impossibility of that idea, more than any, is why Snow must
be lying.
Ultimately, there's only one person to turn to who might
know what happened and might still be on my side. To
broach the subject at all will be a risk. But while I think
Haymitch might gamble with my life in the arena, I don't
think he'd rat me out to Coin. Whatever problems we may
have with each other, we prefer resolving our differences
one-on-one.
I scramble off the tiles, out the door, and across the hall
to his room. When there's no response to my knock, I push
inside. Ugh. It's amazing how quickly he can defile a space.
Half-eaten plates of food, shattered liquor bottles, and
pieces of broken furniture from a drunken rampage scatter
his quarters. He lies, unkempt and unwashed, in a tangle of
sheets on the bed, passed out.
"Haymitch," I say, shaking his leg. Of course, that's
insufficient. But I give it a few more tries before I dump the
pitcher of water in his face. He comes to with a gasp,
slashing blindly with his knife. Apparently, the end of Snow's
reign didn't equal the end of his terror.
"Oh. You," he says. I can tell by his voice that he's still
loaded.
"Haymitch," I begin.
"Listen to that. The Mockingjay found her voice." He
laughs. "Well, Plutarch's going to be happy." He takes a
swig from a bottle. "Why am I soaking wet?" I lamely drop
the pitcher behind me into a pile of dirty clothes.
"I need your help," I say.
Haymitch belches, filling the air with white liquor fumes.
"What is it, sweetheart? More boy trouble?" I don't know
why, but this hurts me in a way Haymitch rarely can. It must
show on my face, because even in his drunken state, he
tries to take it back. "Okay, not funny." I'm already at the
door. "Not funny! Come back!" By the thud of his body
hitting the floor, I assume he tried to follow me, but there's
no point.
I zigzag through the mansion and disappear into a
wardrobe full of silken things. I yank them from hangers until
I have a pile and then burrow into it. In the lining of my
pocket, I find a stray morphling tablet and swallow it dry,
heading off my rising hysteria. It's not enough to right things,
though. I hear Haymitch calling me in the distance, but he
won't find me in his condition. Especially not in this new
spot. Swathed in silk, I feel like a caterpillar in a cocoon
awaiting metamorphosis. I always supposed that to be a
peaceful condition. At first it is. But as I journey into night, I
feel more and more trapped, suffocated by the slippery
bindings, unable to emerge until I have transformed into
something of beauty. I squirm, trying to shed my ruined
body and unlock the secret to growing flawless wings.
Despite enormous effort, I remain a hideous creature, fired
into my current form by the blast from the bombs.
The encounter with Snow opens the door to my old
repertoire of nightmares. It's like being stung by tracker
jackers again. A wave of horrifying images with a brief
respite I confuse with waking--only to find another wave
knocking me back. When the guards finally locate me, I'm
sitting on the floor of the wardrobe, tangled in silk,
screaming my head off. I fight them at first, until they
convince me they're trying to help, peel away the choking
garments, and escort me back to my room. On the way, we
pass a window and I see a gray, snowy dawn spreading
across the Capitol.
A very hungover Haymitch waits with a handful of pills
and a tray of food that neither of us has the stomach for. He
makes a feeble attempt to get me to talk again but, seeing
it's pointless, sends me to a bath someone has drawn. The
tub's deep, with three steps to the bottom. I ease down into
the warm water and sit, up to my neck in suds, hoping the
medicines kick in soon. My eyes focus on the rose that has
spread its petals overnight, filling the steamy air with its
strong perfume. I rise and reach for a towel to smother it,
when there's a tentative knock and the bathroom door
opens, revealing three familiar faces. They try to smile at
me, but even Venia can't conceal her shock at my ravaged
mutt body. "Surprise!" Octavia squeaks, and then bursts
into tears. I'm puzzling over their reappearance when I
realize that this must be it, the day of the execution. They've
come to prep me for the cameras. Remake me to Beauty
Base Zero. No wonder Octavia's crying. It's an impossible
task.
They can barely touch my patchwork of skin for fear of
hurting me, so I rinse and dry off myself. I tell them I hardly
notice the pain anymore, but Flavius still winces as he
drapes a robe around me. In the bedroom, I find another
surprise. Sitting upright in a chair. Polished from her
metallic gold wig to her patent leather high heels, gripping a
clipboard. Remarkably unchanged except for the vacant
look in her eyes.
"Effie," I say.
"Hello, Katniss." She stands and kisses me on the
cheek as if nothing has occurred since our last meeting, the
night before the Quarter Quell. "Well, it looks like we've got
another big, big, big day ahead of us. So why don't you
start your prep and I'll just pop over and check on the
arrangements."
"Okay," I say to her back.
"They say Plutarch and Haymitch had a hard time
keeping her alive," comments Venia under her breath. "She
was imprisoned after your escape, so that helps."
It's quite a stretch. Effie Trinket, rebel. But I don't want
Coin killing her, so I make a mental note to present her that
way if asked. "I guess it's good Plutarch kidnapped you
three after all."
"We're the only prep team still alive. And all the stylists
from the Quarter Quell are dead," says Venia. She doesn't
say who specifically killed them. I'm beginning to wonder if
it matters. She gingerly takes one of my scarred hands and
holds it out for inspection. "Now, what do you think for the
nails? Red or maybe a jet black?"
Flavius performs some beauty miracle on my hair,
managing to even out the front while getting some of the
longer locks to hide the bald spots in the back. My face,
since it was spared from the flames, presents no more than
the usual challenges. Once I'm in Cinna's Mockingjay suit,
the only scars visible are on my neck, forearms, and hands.
Octavia secures my Mockingjay pin over my heart and we
step back to look in the mirror. I can't believe how normal
they've made me look on the outside when inwardly I'm
such a wasteland.
There's a tap at the door and Gale steps in. "Can I
have a minute?" he asks. In the mirror, I watch my prep
team. Unsure of where to go, they bump into one another a
few times and then closet themselves in the bathroom. Gale
comes up behind me and we examine each other's
reflection. I'm searching for something to hang on to, some
sign of the girl and boy who met by chance in the woods
five years ago and became inseparable. I'm wondering
what would have happened to them if the Hunger Games
had not reaped the girl. If she would have fallen in love with
the boy, married him even. And sometime in the future,
when the brothers and sisters had been raised up,
escaped with him into the woods and left 12 behind forever.
Would they have been happy, out in the wild, or would the
dark, twisted sadness between them have grown up even
without the Capitol's help?
"I brought you this." Gale holds up a sheath. When I
take it, I notice it holds a single, ordinary arrow. "It's
supposed to be symbolic. You firing the last shot of the
war."
"What if I miss?" I say. "Does Coin retrieve it and bring
it back to me? Or just shoot Snow through the head
herself?"
"You won't miss." Gale adjusts the sheath on my
shoulder.
We stand there, face-to-face, not meeting each other's
eyes. "You didn't come see me in the hospital." He doesn't
answer, so finally I just say it. "Was it your bomb?"
"I don't know. Neither does Beetee," he says. "Does it
matter? You'll always be thinking about it."
He waits for me to deny it; I want to deny it, but it's true.
Even now I can see the flash that ignites her, feel the heat of
the flames. And I will never be able to separate that
moment from Gale. My silence is my answer.
"That was the one thing I had going for me. Taking
care of your family," he says. "Shoot straight, okay?" He
touches my cheek and leaves. I want to call him back and
tell him that I was wrong. That I'll figure out a way to make
peace with this. To remember the circumstances under
which he created the bomb. Take into account my own
inexcusable crimes. Dig up the truth about who dropped the
parachutes. Prove it wasn't the rebels. Forgive him. But
since I can't, I'll just have to deal with the pain.
Effie comes in to usher me to some kind of meeting. I
collect my bow and at the last minute remember the rose,
glistening in its glass of water. When I open the door to the
bathroom, I find my prep team sitting in a row on the edge
of the tub, hunched and defeated. I remember I'm not the
only one whose world has been stripped away. "Come on,"
I tell them. "We've got an audience waiting."
I'm expecting a production meeting in which Plutarch
instructs me where to stand and gives me my cue for
shooting Snow. Instead, I find myself sent into a room
where six people sit around a table. Peeta, Johanna,
Beetee, Haymitch, Annie, and Enobaria. They all wear the
gray rebel uniforms from 13. No one looks particularly well.
"What's this?" I say.
"We're not sure," Haymitch answers. "It appears to be
a gathering of the remaining victors."
"We're all that's left?" I ask.
"The price of celebrity," says Beetee. "We were
targeted from both sides. The Capitol killed the victors they
suspected of being rebels. The rebels killed those thought
to be allied with the Capitol."
Johanna scowls at Enobaria. "So what's she doing
here?"
"She is protected under what we call the Mockingjay
Deal," says Coin as she enters behind me. "Wherein
Katniss Everdeen agreed to support the rebels in
exchange for captured victors' immunity. Katniss has
upheld her side of the bargain, and so shall we."
Enobaria smiles at Johanna. "Don't look so smug,"
says Johanna. "We'll kill you anyway."
"Sit down, please, Katniss," says Coin, closing the
door. I take a seat between Annie and Beetee, carefully
placing Snow's rose on the table. As usual, Coin gets right
to the point. "I've asked you here to settle a debate. Today
we will execute Snow. In the previous weeks, hundreds of
his accomplices in the oppression of Panem have been
tried and now await their own deaths. However, the
suffering in the districts has been so extreme that these
measures appear insufficient to the victims. In fact, many
are calling for a complete annihilation of those who held
Capitol citizenship. However, in the interest of maintaining
a sustainable population, we cannot afford this."
Through the water in the glass, I see a distorted image
of one of Peeta's hands. The burn marks. We are both fire
mutts now. My eyes travel up to where the flames licked
across his forehead, singeing away his brows but just
missing his eyes. Those same blue eyes that used to meet
mine and then flit away at school. Just as they do now.
"So, an alternative has been placed on the table.
Since my colleagues and I can come to no consensus, it
has been agreed that we will let the victors decide. A
majority of four will approve the plan. No one may abstain
from the vote," says Coin. "What has been proposed is that
in lieu of eliminating the entire Capitol population, we have
a final, symbolic Hunger Games, using the children directly
related to those who held the most power."
All seven of us turn to her. "What?" says Johanna.
"We hold another Hunger Games using Capitol
children," says Coin.
"Are you joking?" asks Peeta.
"No. I should also tell you that if we do hold the Games,
it will be known it was done with your approval, although the
individual breakdown of your votes will be kept secret for
your own security," Coin tells us.
"Was this Plutarch's idea?" asks Haymitch.
"It was mine," says Coin. "It seemed to balance the
need for vengeance with the least loss of life. You may cast
your votes."
"No!" bursts out Peeta. "I vote no, of course! We can't
have another Hunger Games!"
"Why not?" Johanna retorts. "It seems very fair to me.
Snow even has a granddaughter. I vote yes."
"So do I," says Enobaria, almost indifferently. "Let
them have a taste of their own medicine."
"This is why we rebelled! Remember?" Peeta looks at
the rest of us. "Annie?"
"I vote no with Peeta," she says. "So would Finnick if
he were here."
"But he isn't, because Snow's mutts killed him,"
Johanna reminds her.
"No," says Beetee. "It would set a bad precedent. We
have to stop viewing one another as enemies. At this point,
unity is essential for our survival. No."
"We're down to Katniss and Haymitch," says Coin.
Was it like this then? Seventy-five years or so ago?
Did a group of people sit around and cast their votes on
initiating the Hunger Games? Was there dissent? Did
someone make a case for mercy that was beaten down by
the calls for the deaths of the districts' children? The scent
of Snow's rose curls up into my nose, down into my throat,
squeezing it tight with despair. All those people I loved,
dead, and we are discussing the next Hunger Games in an
attempt to avoid wasting life. Nothing has changed. Nothing
will ever change now.
I weigh my options carefully, think everything through.
Keeping my eyes on the rose, I say, "I vote yes...for Prim."
"Haymitch, it's up to you," says Coin.
A furious Peeta hammers Haymitch with the atrocity he
could become party to, but I can feel Haymitch watching
me. This is the moment, then. When we find out exactly just
how alike we are, and how much he truly understands me.
"I'm with the Mockingjay," he says.
"Excellent. That carries the vote," says Coin. "Now we
really must take our places for the execution."
As she passes me, I hold up the glass with the rose.
"Can you see that Snow's wearing this? Just over his
heart?"
Coin smiles. "Of course. And I'll make sure he knows
about the Games."
"Thank you," I say.
People sweep into the room, surround me. The last
touch of powder, the instructions from Plutarch as I'm
guided to the front doors of the mansion. The City Circle
runs over, spills people down the side streets. The others
take their places outside. Guards. Officials. Rebel leaders.
Victors. I hear the cheers that indicate Coin has appeared
on the balcony. Then Effie taps my shoulder, and I step out
into the cold winter sunlight. Walk to my position,
accompanied by the deafening roar of the crowd. As
directed, I turn so they see me in profile, and wait. When
they march Snow out the door, the audience goes insane.
They secure his hands behind a post, which is
unnecessary. He's not going anywhere. There's nowhere to
go. This is not the roomy stage before the Training Center
but the narrow terrace in front of the president's mansion.
No wonder no one bothered to have me practice. He's ten
yards away.
I feel the bow purring in my hand. Reach back and
grasp the arrow. Position it, aim at the rose, but watch his
face. He coughs and a bloody dribble runs down his chin.
His tongue flicks over his puffy lips. I search his eyes for the
slightest sign of anything, fear, remorse, anger. But there's
only the same look of amusement that ended our last
conversation. It's as if he's speaking the words again. "Oh,
my dear Miss Everdeen. I thought we had agreed not to
lie to each other."
He's right. We did.
The point of my arrow shifts upward. I release the
string. And President Coin collapses over the side of the
balcony and plunges to the ground. Dead.
27
In the stunned reaction that follows, I'm aware of one
sound. Snow's laughter. An awful gurgling cackle
accompanied by an eruption of foamy blood when the
coughing begins. I see him bend forward, spewing out his
life, until the guards block him from my sight.
As the gray uniforms begin to converge on me, I think
of what my brief future as the assassin of Panem's new
president holds. The interrogation, probable torture, certain
public execution. Having, yet again, to say my final
goodbyes to the handful of people who still maintain a hold
on my heart. The prospect of facing my mother, who will
now be entirely alone in the world, decides it.
"Good night," I whisper to the bow in my hand and feel
it go still. I raise my left arm and twist my neck down to rip
off the pill on my sleeve. Instead my teeth sink into flesh. I
yank my head back in confusion to find myself looking into
Peeta's eyes, only now they hold my gaze. Blood runs from
the teeth marks on the hand he clamped over my nightlock.
"Let me go!" I snarl at him, trying to wrest my arm from his
grasp.
"I can't," he says. As they pull me away from him, I feel
the pocket ripped from my sleeve, see the deep violet pill
fall to the ground, watch Cinna's last gift get crunched under
a guard's boot. I transform into a wild animal, kicking,
clawing, biting, doing whatever I can to free myself from this
web of hands as the crowd pushes in. The guards lift me up
above the fray, where I continue to thrash as I'm conveyed
over the crush of people. I start screaming for Gale. I can't
find him in the throng, but he will know what I want. A good
clean shot to end it all. Only there's no arrow, no bullet. Is it
possible he can't see me? No. Above us, on the giant
screens placed around the City Circle, everyone can watch
the whole thing being played out. He sees, he knows, but
he doesn't follow through. Just as I didn't when he was
captured. Sorry excuses for hunters and friends. Both of us.
I'm on my own.
In the mansion, they handcuff and blindfold me. I'm half
dragged, half carried down long passages, up and down
elevators, and deposited on a carpeted floor. The cuffs are
removed and a door slams closed behind me. When I push
the blindfold up, I find I'm in my old room at the Training
Center. The one where I lived during those last precious
days before my first Hunger Games and the Quarter Quell.
The bed's stripped to the mattress, the closet gapes open,
showing the emptiness inside, but I'd know this room
anywhere.
It's a struggle to get to my feet and peel off my
Mockingjay suit. I'm badly bruised and might have a broken
finger or two, but it's my skin that's paid most dearly for my
struggle with the guards. The new pink stuff has shredded
like tissue paper and blood seeps through the laboratorygrown
cells. No medics show up, though, and as I'm too far
gone to care, I crawl up onto the mattress, expecting to
bleed to death.
No such luck. By evening, the blood clots, leaving me
stiff and sore and sticky but alive. I limp into the shower and
program in the gentlest cycle I can remember, free of any
soaps and hair products, and squat under the warm spray,
elbows on my knees, head in my hands.
My name is Katniss Everdeen. Why am I not dead? I
should be dead. It would be best for everyone if I were
dead....
When I step out on the mat, the hot air bakes my
damaged skin dry. There's nothing clean to put on. Not
even a towel to wrap around me. Back in the room, I find
the Mockingjay suit has disappeared. In its place is a paper
robe. A meal has been sent up from the mysterious kitchen
with a container of my medications for dessert. I go ahead
and eat the food, take the pills, rub the salve on my skin. I
need to focus now on the manner of my suicide.
I curl back up on the bloodstained mattress, not cold
but feeling so naked with just the paper to cover my tender
flesh. Jumping to my death's not an option--the window
glass must be a foot thick. I can make an excellent noose,
but there's nothing to hang myself from. It's possible I could
hoard my pills and then knock myself off with a lethal dose,
except that I'm sure I'm being watched round the clock. For
all I know, I'm on live television at this very moment while
commentators try to analyze what could possibly have
motivated me to kill Coin. The surveillance makes almost
any suicide attempt impossible. Taking my life is the
Capitol's privilege. Again.
What I can do is give up. I resolve to lie on the bed
without eating, drinking, or taking my medications. I could
do it, too. Just die. If it weren't for the morphling withdrawal.
Not bit by bit like in the hospital in 13, but cold turkey. I must
have been on a fairly large dose because when the craving
for it hits, accompanied by tremors, and shooting pains,
and unbearable cold, my resolve's crushed like an eggshell.
I'm on my knees, raking the carpet with my fingernails to
find those precious pills I flung away in a stronger moment. I
revise my suicide plan to slow death by morphling. I will
become a yellow-skinned bag of bones, with enormous
eyes. I'm a couple of days into the plan, making good
progress, when something unexpected happens.
I begin to sing. At the window, in the shower, in my
sleep. Hour after hour of ballads, love songs, mountain airs.
All the songs my father taught me before he died, for
certainly there has been very little music in my life since.
What's amazing is how clearly I remember them. The tunes,
the lyrics. My voice, at first rough and breaking on the high
notes, warms up into something splendid. A voice that
would make the mockingjays fall silent and then tumble over
themselves to join in. Days pass, weeks. I watch the snows
fall on the ledge outside my window. And in all that time,
mine is the only voice I hear.
What are they doing, anyway? What's the holdup out
there? How difficult can it be to arrange the execution of
one murderous girl? I continue with my own annihilation. My
body's thinner than it's ever been and my battle against
hunger is so fierce that sometimes the animal part of me
gives in to the temptation of buttered bread or roasted
meat. But still, I'm winning. For a few days I feel quite unwell
and think I may finally be traveling out of this life, when I
realize my morphling tablets are shrinking. They are trying
to slowly wean me off the stuff. But why? Surely a drugged
Mockingjay will be easier to dispose of in front of a crowd.
And then a terrible thought hits me: What if they're not going
to kill me? What if they have more plans for me? A new way
to remake, train, and use me?
I won't do it. If I can't kill myself in this room, I will take
the first opportunity outside of it to finish the job. They can
fatten me up. They can give me a full body polish, dress me
up, and make me beautiful again. They can design dream
weapons that come to life in my hands, but they will never
again brainwash me into the necessity of using them. I no
longer feel any allegiance to these monsters called human
beings, despise being one myself. I think that Peeta was
onto something about us destroying one another and letting
some decent species take over. Because something is
significantly wrong with a creature that sacrifices its
children's lives to settle its differences. You can spin it any
way you like. Snow thought the Hunger Games were an
efficient means of control. Coin thought the parachutes
would expedite the war. But in the end, who does it benefit?
No one. The truth is, it benefits no one to live in a world
where these things happen.
After two days of my lying on my mattress with no
attempt to eat, drink, or even take a morphling tablet, the
door to my room opens. Someone crosses around the bed
into my field of vision. Haymitch. "Your trial's over," he says.
"Come on. We're going home."
Home? What's he talking about? My home's gone.
And even if it were possible to go to this imaginary place, I
am too weak to move. Strangers appear. Rehydrate and
feed me. Bathe and clothe me. One lifts me like a rag doll
and carries me up to the roof, onto a hovercraft, and
fastens me into a seat. Haymitch and Plutarch sit across
from me. In a few moments, we're airborne.
I've never seen Plutarch in such a good mood. He's
positively glowing. "You must have a million questions!"
When I don't respond, he answers them anyway.
After I shot Coin, there was pandemonium. When the
ruckus died down, they discovered Snow's body, still
tethered to the post. Opinions differ on whether he choked
to death while laughing or was crushed by the crowd. No
one really cares. An emergency election was thrown
together and Paylor was voted in as president. Plutarch
was appointed secretary of communications, which means
he sets the programming for the airwaves. The first big
televised event was my trial, in which he was also a star
witness. In my defense, of course. Although most of the
credit for my exoneration must be given to Dr. Aurelius, who
apparently earned his naps by presenting me as a
hopeless, shell-shocked lunatic. One condition for my
release is that I'll continue under his care, although it will
have to be by phone because he'd never live in a forsaken
place like 12, and I'm confined there until further notice. The
truth is, no one quite knows what to do with me now that the
war's over, although if another one should spring up,
Plutarch's sure they could find a role for me. Then Plutarch
has a good laugh. It never seems to bother him when no
one else appreciates his jokes.
"Are you preparing for another war, Plutarch?" I ask.
"Oh, not now. Now we're in that sweet period where
everyone agrees that our recent horrors should never be
repeated," he says. "But collective thinking is usually shortlived.
We're fickle, stupid beings with poor memories and a
great gift for self-destruction. Although who knows? Maybe
this will be it, Katniss."
"What?" I ask.
"The time it sticks. Maybe we are witnessing the
evolution of the human race. Think about that." And then he
asks me if I'd like to perform on a new singing program he's
launching in a few weeks. Something upbeat would be
good. He'll send the crew to my house.
We land briefly in District 3 to drop off Plutarch. He's
meeting with Beetee to update the technology on the
broadcast system. His parting words to me are "Don't be a
stranger."
When we're back among the clouds, I look at
Haymitch. "So why are you going back to Twelve?"
"They can't seem to find a place for me in the Capitol
either," he says.
At first, I don't question this. But doubts begin to creep
in. Haymitch hasn't assassinated anyone. He could go
anywhere. If he's coming back to 12, it's because he's been
ordered to. "You have to look after me, don't you? As my
mentor?" He shrugs. Then I realize what it means. "My
mother's not coming back."
"No," he says. He pulls an envelope from his jacket
pocket and hands it to me. I examine the delicate, perfectly
formed writing. "She's helping to start up a hospital in
District Four. She wants you to call as soon as we get in."
My finger traces the graceful swoop of the letters. "You
know why she can't come back." Yes, I know why. Because
between my father and Prim and the ashes, the place is too
painful to bear. But apparently not for me. "Do you want to
know who else won't be there?"
"No," I say. "I want to be surprised."
Like a good mentor, Haymitch makes me eat a
sandwich and then pretends he believes I'm asleep for the
rest of the trip. He busies himself going through every
compartment on the hovercraft, finding the liquor, and
stowing it in his bag. It's night when we land on the green of
the Victor's Village. Half of the houses have lights in the
windows, including Haymitch's and mine. Not Peeta's.
Someone has built a fire in my kitchen. I sit in the rocker
before it, clutching my mother's letter.
"Well, see you tomorrow," says Haymitch.
As the clinking of his bag of liquor bottles fades away, I
whisper, "I doubt it."
I am unable to move from the chair. The rest of the
house looms cold and empty and dark. I pull an old shawl
over my body and watch the flames. I guess I sleep,
because the next thing I know, it's morning and Greasy
Sae's banging around at the stove. She makes me eggs
and toast and sits there until I've eaten it all. We don't talk
much. Her little granddaughter, the one who lives in her own
world, takes a bright blue ball of yarn from my mother's
knitting basket. Greasy Sae tells her to put it back, but I say
she can have it. No one in this house can knit anymore.
After breakfast, Greasy Sae does the dishes and leaves,
but she comes back up at dinnertime to make me eat
again. I don't know if she's just being neighborly or if she's
on the government's payroll, but she shows up twice every
day. She cooks, I consume. I try to figure out my next move.
There's no obstacle now to taking my life. But I seem to be
waiting for something.
Sometimes the phone rings and rings and rings, but I
don't pick it up. Haymitch never visits. Maybe he changed
his mind and left, although I suspect he's just drunk. No one
comes but Greasy Sae and her granddaughter. After
months of solitary confinement, they seem like a crowd.
"Spring's in the air today. You ought to get out," she
says. "Go hunting."
I haven't left the house. I haven't even left the kitchen
except to go to the small bathroom a few steps off of it. I'm
in the same clothes I left the Capitol in. What I do is sit by
the fire. Stare at the unopened letters piling up on the
mantel. "I don't have a bow."
"Check down the hall," she says.
After she leaves, I consider a trip down the hall. Rule it
out. But after several hours, I go anyway, walking in silent
sock feet, so as not to awaken the ghosts. In the study,
where I had my tea with President Snow, I find a box with
my father's hunting jacket, our plant book, my parents'
wedding photo, the spile Haymitch sent in, and the locket
Peeta gave me in the clock arena. The two bows and a
sheath of arrows Gale rescued on the night of the
firebombing lie on the desk. I put on the hunting jacket and
leave the rest of the stuff untouched. I fall asleep on the sofa
in the formal living room. A terrible nightmare follows, where
I'm lying at the bottom of a deep grave, and every dead
person I know by name comes by and throws a shovel full of
ashes on me. It's quite a long dream, considering the list of
people, and the deeper I'm buried, the harder it is to
breathe. I try to call out, begging them to stop, but the ashes
fill my mouth and nose and I can't make any sound. Still the
shovel scrapes on and on and on....
I wake with a start. Pale morning light comes around
the edges of the shutters. The scraping of the shovel
continues. Still half in the nightmare, I run down the hall, out
the front door, and around the side of the house, because
now I'm pretty sure I can scream at the dead. When I see
him, I pull up short. His face is flushed from digging up the
ground under the windows. In a wheelbarrow are five
scraggly bushes.
"You're back," I say.
"Dr. Aurelius wouldn't let me leave the Capitol until
yesterday," Peeta says. "By the way, he said to tell you he
can't keep pretending he's treating you forever. You have to
pick up the phone."
He looks well. Thin and covered with burn scars like
me, but his eyes have lost that clouded, tortured look. He's
frowning slightly, though, as he takes me in. I make a
halfhearted effort to push my hair out of my eyes and realize
it's matted into clumps. I feel defensive. "What are you
doing?"
"I went to the woods this morning and dug these up.
For her," he says. "I thought we could plant them along the
side of the house."
I look at the bushes, the clods of dirt hanging from their
roots, and catch my breath as the word rose registers. I'm
about to yell vicious things at Peeta when the full name
comes to me. Not plain rose but evening primrose. The
flower my sister was named for. I give Peeta a nod of
assent and hurry back into the house, locking the door
behind me. But the evil thing is inside, not out. Trembling
with weakness and anxiety, I run up the stairs. My foot
catches on the last step and I crash onto the floor. I force
myself to rise and enter my room. The smell's very faint but
still laces the air. It's there. The white rose among the dried
flowers in the vase. Shriveled and fragile, but holding on to
that unnatural perfection cultivated in Snow's greenhouse. I
grab the vase, stumble down to the kitchen, and throw its
contents into the embers. As the flowers flare up, a burst of
blue flame envelops the rose and devours it. Fire beats
roses again. I smash the vase on the floor for good
measure.
Back upstairs, I throw open the bedroom windows to
clear out the rest of Snow's stench. But it still lingers, on my
clothes and in my pores. I strip, and flakes of skin the size
of playing cards cling to the garments. Avoiding the mirror, I
step into the shower and scrub the roses from my hair, my
body, my mouth. Bright pink and tingling, I find something
clean to wear. It takes half an hour to comb out my hair.
Greasy Sae unlocks the front door. While she makes
breakfast, I feed the clothes I had shed to the fire. At her
suggestion, I pare off my nails with a knife.
Over the eggs, I ask her, "Where did Gale go?"
"District Two. Got some fancy job there. I see him now
and again on the television," she says.
I dig around inside myself, trying to register anger,
hatred, longing. I find only relief.
"I'm going hunting today," I say.
"Well, I wouldn't mind some fresh game at that," she
answers.
I arm myself with a bow and arrows and head out,
intending to exit 12 through the Meadow. Near the square
are teams of masked and gloved people with horse-drawn
carts. Sifting through what lay under the snow this winter.
Gathering remains. A cart's parked in front of the mayor's
house. I recognize Thom, Gale's old crewmate, pausing a
moment to wipe the sweat from his face with a rag. I
remember seeing him in 13, but he must have come back.
His greeting gives me the courage to ask, "Did they find
anyone in there?"
"Whole family. And the two people who worked for
them," Thom tells me.
Madge. Quiet and kind and brave. The girl who gave
me the pin that gave me a name. I swallow hard. Wonder if
she'll be joining the cast of my nightmares tonight.
Shoveling the ashes into my mouth. "I thought maybe, since
he was the mayor..."
"I don't think being the mayor of Twelve put the odds in
his favor," says Thom.
I nod and keep moving, careful not to look in the back
of the cart. All through the town and the Seam, it's the
same. The reaping of the dead. As I near the ruins of my
old house, the road becomes thick with carts. The
Meadow's gone, or at least dramatically altered. A deep pit
has been dug, and they're lining it with bones, a mass
grave for my people. I skirt around the hole and enter the
woods at my usual place. It doesn't matter, though. The
fence isn't charged anymore and has been propped up with
long branches to keep out the predators. But old habits die
hard. I think about going to the lake, but I'm so weak that I
barely make it to my meeting place with Gale. I sit on the
rock where Cressida filmed us, but it's too wide without his
body beside me. Several times I close my eyes and count
to ten, thinking that when I open them, he will have
materialized without a sound as he so often did. I have to
remind myself that Gale's in 2 with a fancy job, probably
kissing another pair of lips.
It is the old Katniss's favorite kind of day. Early spring.
The woods awakening after the long winter. But the spurt of
energy that began with the primroses fades away. By the
time I make it back to the fence, I'm so sick and dizzy,
Thom has to give me a ride home in the dead people's
cart. Help me to the sofa in the living room, where I watch
the dust motes spin in the thin shafts of afternoon light.
My head snaps around at the hiss, but it takes awhile
to believe he's real. How could he have gotten here? I take
in the claw marks from some wild animal, the back paw he
holds slightly above the ground, the prominent bones in his
face. He's come on foot, then, all the way from 13. Maybe
they kicked him out or maybe he just couldn't stand it there
without her, so he came looking.
"It was the waste of a trip. She's not here," I tell him.
Buttercup hisses again. "She's not here. You can hiss all
you like. You won't find Prim." At her name, he perks up.
Raises his flattened ears. Begins to meow hopefully. "Get
out!" He dodges the pillow I throw at him. "Go away!
There's nothing left for you here!" I start to shake, furious
with him. "She's not coming back! She's never ever coming
back here again!" I grab another pillow and get to my feet
to improve my aim. Out of nowhere, the tears begin to pour
down my cheeks. "She's dead." I clutch my middle to dull
the pain. Sink down on my heels, rocking the pillow, crying.
"She's dead, you stupid cat. She's dead." A new sound,
part crying, part singing, comes out of my body, giving
voice to my despair. Buttercup begins to wail as well. No
matter what I do, he won't go. He circles me, just out of
reach, as wave after wave of sobs racks my body, until
eventually I fall unconscious. But he must understand. He
must know that the unthinkable has happened and to
survive will require previously unthinkable acts. Because
hours later, when I come to in my bed, he's there in the
moonlight. Crouched beside me, yellow eyes alert,
guarding me from the night.
In the morning, he sits stoically as I clean the cuts, but
digging the thorn from his paw brings on a round of those
kitten mews. We both end up crying again, only this time we
comfort each other. On the strength of this, I open the letter
Haymitch gave me from my mother, dial the phone number,
and weep with her as well. Peeta, bearing a warm loaf of
bread, shows up with Greasy Sae. She makes us breakfast
and I feed all my bacon to Buttercup.
Slowly, with many lost days, I come back to life. I try to
follow Dr. Aurelius's advice, just going through the motions,
amazed when one finally has meaning again. I tell him my
idea about the book, and a large box of parchment sheets
arrives on the next train from the Capitol.
I got the idea from our family's plant book. The place
where we recorded those things you cannot trust to
memory. The page begins with the person's picture. A
photo if we can find it. If not, a sketch or painting by Peeta.
Then, in my most careful handwriting, come all the details it
would be a crime to forget. Lady licking Prim's cheek. My
father's laugh. Peeta's father with the cookies. The color of
Finnick's eyes. What Cinna could do with a length of silk.
Boggs reprogramming the Holo. Rue poised on her toes,
arms slightly extended, like a bird about to take flight. On
and on. We seal the pages with salt water and promises to
live well to make their deaths count. Haymitch finally joins
us, contributing twenty-three years of tributes he was forced
to mentor. Additions become smaller. An old memory that
surfaces. A late primrose preserved between the pages.
Strange bits of happiness, like the photo of Finnick and
Annie's newborn son.
We learn to keep busy again. Peeta bakes. I hunt.
Haymitch drinks until the liquor runs out, and then raises
geese until the next train arrives. Fortunately, the geese can
take pretty good care of themselves. We're not alone. A
few hundred others return because, whatever has
happened, this is our home. With the mines closed, they
plow the ashes into the earth and plant food. Machines from
the Capitol break ground for a new factory where we will
make medicines. Although no one seeds it, the Meadow
turns green again.
Peeta and I grow back together. There are still
moments when he clutches the back of a chair and hangs
on until the flashbacks are over. I wake screaming from
nightmares of mutts and lost children. But his arms are
there to comfort me. And eventually his lips. On the night I
feel that thing again, the hunger that overtook me on the
beach, I know this would have happened anyway. That what
I need to survive is not Gale's fire, kindled with rage and
hatred. I have plenty of fire myself. What I need is the
dandelion in the spring. The bright yellow that means rebirth
instead of destruction. The promise that life can go on, no
matter how bad our losses. That it can be good again. And
only Peeta can give me that.
So after, when he whispers, "You love me. Real or not
real?"
I tell him, "Real."
EPILOGUE
They play in the Meadow. The dancing girl with the
dark hair and blue eyes. The boy with blond curls and gray
eyes, struggling to keep up with her on his chubby toddler
legs. It took five, ten, fifteen years for me to agree. But
Peeta wanted them so badly. When I first felt her stirring
inside of me, I was consumed with a terror that felt as old
as life itself. Only the joy of holding her in my arms could
tame it. Carrying him was a little easier, but not much.
The questions are just beginning. The arenas have
been completely destroyed, the memorials built, there are
no more Hunger Games. But they teach about them at
school, and the girl knows we played a role in them. The
boy will know in a few years. How can I tell them about that
world without frightening them to death? My children, who
take the words of the song for granted:
Deep in the meadow, under the willow
A bed of grass, a soft green pillow
Lay down your head, and close your sleepy
eyes
And when again they open, the sun will rise.
Here it's safe, here it's warm
Here the daisies guard you from every harm
Here your dreams are sweet and tomorrow
brings them true
Here is the place where I love you.
My children, who don't know they play on a graveyard.
Peeta says it will be okay. We have each other. And
the book. We can make them understand in a way that will
make them braver. But one day I'll have to explain about my
nightmares. Why they came. Why they won't ever really go
away.
I'll tell them how I survive it. I'll tell them that on bad
mornings, it feels impossible to take pleasure in anything
because I'm afraid it could be taken away. That's when I
make a list in my head of every act of goodness I've seen
someone do. It's like a game. Repetitive. Even a little
tedious after more than twenty years.
But there are much worse games to play.
THE END
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to pay tribute to the following people who
gave their time, talent, and support to The Hunger Games.
First off, I must thank my extraordinary triumvirate of
editors. Kate Egan, whose insight, humor, and intelligence
have guided me through eight novels; Jen Rees, whose
clear vision catches the things the rest of us miss; and
David Levithan, who moves so effortlessly through his
multiple roles of Note Giver, Title Master, and Editorial
Director.
Through rough drafts, food poisoning, every up and
down, you are there with me, Rosemary Stimola, equal
parts gifted creative advisor and professional guardian, my
literary agent and my friend. And Jason Dravis, my longtime
entertainment agent, I feel so lucky to have you watching
over me as we head for the screen.
Thanks to designer Elizabeth B. Parisi and artist Tim
O'Brien for the beautiful book jackets that so successfully
captured both the mockingjays and people's attention.
All hail the incredible team at Scholastic for getting
The Hunger Games out into the world: Sheila Marie Everett,
Tracy van Straaten, Rachel Coun, Leslie Garych, Adrienne
Vrettos, Nick Martin, Jacky Harper, Lizette Serrano,
Kathleen Donohoe, John Mason, Stephanie Nooney, Karyn
Browne, Joy Simpkins, Jess White, Dick Robinson, Ellie
Berger, Suzanne Murphy, Andrea Davis Pinkney, the entire
Scholastic sales force, and the many others who have
devoted so much energy, smarts, and savvy to this series.
To the five writer-friends I rely on most heavily, Richard
Register, Mary Beth Bass, Christopher Santos, Peter
Bakalian, and James Proimos, much gratitude for your
advice, perspective, and laughter.
Special love to my late father, Michael Collins, who laid
the groundwork for this series with his deep commitment to
educating his children on war and peace, and my mother,
Jane Collins, who introduced me to the Greeks, sci-fi, and
fashion (although that last one didn't stick); my sisters,
Kathy and Joanie; my brother, Drew; my in-laws, Dixie and
Charles Pryor; and the many members of my extended
family whose enthusiasm and support have kept me going.
And finally, I turn to my husband, Cap Pryor, who read
The Hunger Games in its earliest draft, insisted on
answers to questions I hadn't even imagined, and remained
my sounding board through the entire series. Thanks to him
and my wonderful kids, Charlie and Isabel, for their daily
love, their patience, and the joy they bring me.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR
SUZANNE COLLINS is the author of the bestselling
Underland Chronicles series, which started with Gregor the
Overlander. Her groundbreaking young adult novels, The
Hunger Games and Catching Fire, were both New York
Times bestsellers, received wide praise, and garnered
numerous starred reviews. Suzanne lives with her family in
Connecticut. You can find her online at
www.suzannecollinsbooks.com.
